14
Overview of Conveyance
14
Contracts
Contract for Sale
Sale Contract Provisions
Option-To-Buy Contract
Contract for Deed
CONTRACT FOR SALE
Legal characteristics
Contract creation
Earnest money escrow
Contract contingencies
Default
A real estate sale contract is a binding and enforceable agreement wherein a
buyer, the vendee, agrees to buy an identified parcel of real estate, and a seller,
the vendor, agrees to sell it under certain terms and conditions. It is the
document that is at the center of the transaction.
The conventional transfer of real estate ownership takes place in three stages.
First, there is the negotiating period where buyers and sellers exchange offers in
an effort to agree to all transfer terms that will appear in the sale contract.
Second, when both parties have accepted all terms, the offer becomes a binding
sale contract and the transaction enters the pre-closing stage, during which each
party makes arrangements to complete the sale according to the sale contract's
terms. Third is the closing of the transaction, when the seller deeds title to the
buyer, the buyer pays the purchase price, and all necessary documents are
completed. At this stage, the sale contract has served its purpose and terminates.
Other names for the sale contract are agreement of sale, contract for
purchase, contract of purchase and sale, and earnest money contract.
Legal characteristics Executory contract. A sale contract is executory: the signatories have yet to
perform their respective obligations and promises. Upon closing, the sale
contract is fully performed and no longer exists as a binding agreement.
Signatures. All owners of the property should sign the sale contract. If the
sellers are married, both spouses should sign to ensure that both spouses release
homestead, dower, and curtesy rights to the buyer at closing. Failure to do so
does not invalidate the contract but can lead to encumbered title and legal
disputes.
198 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
Enforceability criteria. To be enforceable, a sale contract must:
 be validly created (mutual consent, consideration, legal purpose,
competent parties, voluntary act)
 be in writing
 identify the principal parties
 clearly identify the property, preferably by legal description
 contain a purchase price
 be signed by the principal parties
Written vs. oral form. A contract for the sale of real estate is enforceable only if
it is in writing. A buyer or seller cannot sue to force the other to comply with an
oral contract for sale, even if the contract is valid.
Assignment. Either party to a sale transaction can assign the sale contract to
another party, subject to the provisions and conditions contained in the agreement.
Who may complete. A broker or agent may assist buyer and seller in completing
an offer to purchase, provided the broker represents the client faithfully and does
not charge a separate fee for the assistance. It is advisable, and legally required in
most states, for a broker to use a standard contract form promulgated by state
agencies or real estate boards, as such forms contain generally accepted language.
This relieves the broker of the dangers of creating new contract language, which
can be construed as a practice of law for which the broker is not licensed.
Contract creation Offer and acceptance. A contract of sale is created by full and unequivocal
acceptance of an offer. Offer and acceptance may come from either buyer or
seller. The offeree must accept the offer without making any changes
whatsoever. A change terminates the offer and creates a new offer, or
counteroffer. An offeror may revoke an offer for any reason prior to
communication of acceptance by the offeree.
Equitable title. A sale contract gives the buyer an interest in the property that is
called equitable title, or ownership in equity. If the seller defaults and the buyer
can show good faith performance, the buyer can sue for specific performance, that
is, to compel the seller to transfer legal title upon payment of the contract price.
Earnest money
escrow The buyer's earnest money deposit fulfills the consideration requirements for a
valid sale contract. In addition, it provides potential compensation for damages to
the seller if the buyer fails to perform. The amount of the deposit varies
according to local custom. It should be noted that the earnest money deposit is
not the only form of consideration that satisfies the requirement.
The sale contract provides the escrow instructions for handling and disbursing
escrow funds. The earnest money is placed in a third party trust account or
escrow. A licensed escrow agent employed by a title company, financial
institution, or brokerage company usually manages the escrow. An individual
broker may also serve as the escrow agent.
The escrow holder acts as an impartial fiduciary for buyer and seller. If the buyer
performs under the sale contract, the deposit is applied to the purchase price.
Chapter 14 Overview of Conveyance Contracts 199
---PAGE_BREAK---
Strict rules govern the handling of earnest money deposits, particularly if a
broker is the escrow agent. For example, state laws direct the broker when to
deposit the funds, how to account for them, and how to keep them separate from
the broker's own funds.
Contract
contingencies A sale contract often contains contingencies. A contingency is a condition that
must be met before the contract is enforceable.
The most common contingency concerns financing. A buyer makes an offer
contingent upon securing financing for the property under certain terms on or
before a certain date. If unable to secure the specified loan commitment by the
deadline, the buyer may cancel the contract and recover the deposit. An
appropriate and timely loan commitment eliminates the contingency, and the
buyer must proceed with the purchase.
It is possible for both buyers and sellers to abuse contingencies in order to leave
themselves a convenient way to cancel without defaulting. To avoid problems,
the statement of a contingency should:
 be explicit and clear
 have an expiration date
 expressly require diligence in the
effort to fulfill the requirement
A contingency that is too broad, vague, or excessive in duration may invalidate
the entire contract on the grounds of insufficiency of mutual agreement.
Default A sale contract is bilateral, since both parties promise to perform. As a result,
either party may default by failing to perform. Note that a party's failure to meet a
contingency does not constitute default, but rather entitles the parties to cancel
the contract.
Buyer default. If a buyer fails to perform under the terms of a sale contract, the
breach entitles the seller to legal recourse for damages. In most cases, the
contract itself stipulates the seller's remedies. The usual remedy is forfeiture of
the buyer's deposit as liquidated damages, provided the deposit is not grossly in
excess of the seller's actual damages. It is also customary to provide for the seller
and broker to share the liquidated damages. The broker may not, however,
receive liquidated damages in excess of what the commission would have been
on the full listing price.
If the contract does not provide for liquidated damages, the seller may sue for
damages, cancellation, or specific performance.
Seller default. If a seller defaults, the buyer may sue for specific performance,
damages, or cancellation.
200 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
SALE CONTRACT PROVISIONS
Primary provisions
Secondary provisions
Sale contracts can vary significantly in length and thoroughness. They also vary
according to the type of sale transaction they describe. Some of the varieties are:
 Residential Contract of Sale
 Commercial Contract of Sale
 Foreclosure Contract of Sale
 Contract of Sale for New Construction
 Contract of Sale for Land
 Exchange Agreement
As the most common sale transaction is a residential sale, a Residential Contract
of Sale is the type with which a licensee should first become familiar.
Primary provisions A typical residential sale contract contains provisions of the following kind.
Parties, consideration, and property. One or more clauses will identify the
parties, the property, and the basic consideration, which is the sale of the property
in return for a purchase price.
There must be at least two parties to a sale contract: one cannot convey property
to oneself. All parties must be identified, be of legal age, and have the capacity to
contract.
The property clause also identifies fixtures and personal property included in the
sale. Unless expressly excluded, items commonly construed as fixtures are
included in the sale. Similarly, items commonly considered personal property are
not included unless expressly included.
Legal description. A legal description must be sufficient for a competent
surveyor to identify the property.
Price and terms. A clause states the final price and details how the purchase will
occur. Of particular interest to the seller is the buyer's down payment, since the
greater the buyer's equity, the more likely the buyer will be able to secure
financing. In addition, a large deposit represents a buyer's commitment to
complete the sale.
If seller financing is involved, the sale contract sets forth the terms of the
arrangement: the amount and type of loan, the rate and term, and how the loan
will be paid off.
It is important for all parties to verify that the buyer's earnest money deposit,
down payment, loan proceeds, and other promised funds together equal the
purchase price stated in the contract.
Chapter 14 Overview of Conveyance Contracts 201
---PAGE_BREAK---
Loan approval. A financing contingency clause states under what conditions the
buyer can cancel the contract without default and receive a refund of the earnest
money. If the buyer cannot secure the stated financing by the deadline, the parties
may agree to extend the contingency by signing next to the changed dates.
Earnest money deposit. A clause specifies how the buyer will pay the earnest
money. It may allow the buyer to pay it in installments. Such an option enables a
buyer to hold on to the property briefly while obtaining the additional deposit
funds. For example, a buyer who wants to buy a house makes an initial deposit of
$200, to be followed in twenty-four hours with an additional $2,000. The sale
contract includes the seller's acknowledgment of receipt of the deposit.
Escrow. An escrow clause provides for the custody and disbursement of the
earnest money deposit, and releases the escrow agent from certain liabilities in
the performance of escrow duties.
Closing and possession dates. The contract states when title will transfer, as
well as when the buyer will take physical possession. Customarily, possession
occurs on the date when the deed is recorded, unless the buyer has agreed to other
arrangements.
The closing clause generally describes what must take place at closing to avoid
default. A seller must provide clear and marketable title. A buyer must produce
purchase funds. Failure to complete any pre-closing requirements stated in the
sale contract is default and grounds for the aggrieved party to seek recourse.
Conveyed interest; type of deed. One or more provisions will state what type of
deed the seller will use to convey the property, and what conditions the deed will
be subject to. Among common "subject to" conditions are easements, association
memberships, encumbrances, mortgages, liens, and special assessments.
Typically, the seller conveys a fee simple interest by means of a general warranty
deed.
Title evidence. The seller covenants to produce the best possible evidence of
property ownership. This is commonly in the form of title insurance.
Closing costs. The contract identifies which closing costs each party will pay.
Customarily, the seller pays title and property-related costs, and the buyer pays
financing-related costs. Annual costs such as taxes and insurance are prorated
between the parties. Note that who pays any particular closing cost is an item for
negotiation.
Damage and destruction. A clause stipulates the obligations of the parties in
case the property is damaged or destroyed. The parties may negotiate
alternatives, including seller's obligation to repair, buyer's obligation to buy if
repairs are made, and the option for either party to cancel.
Default. A default clause identifies remedies for default. Generally, a buyer may
sue for damages, specific performance, or cancellation. A seller may do likewise
or claim the earnest money as liquidated damages.
202 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
Broker's representation and commission. The broker discloses the applicable
agency relationships in the transaction and names the party who must pay the
brokerage commission.
Seller's representations. The seller warrants that there will be no liens on the
property that cannot be settled and extinguished at closing. In addition, the seller
warrants that all representations are true, and if found otherwise, the buyer may
cancel the contract and reclaim the deposit.
Secondary
provisions A sale contract may contain numerous additional clauses, depending on the
complexity of the transaction. The following are some of the common provisions.
Inspections. The parties agree to inspections and remedial action based on
findings.
Owner's association disclosure. The seller discloses existence of an association
and the obligations it imposes.
Survey. The parties agree to a survey to satisfy financing requirements.
Environmental hazards. The seller notifies the buyer that there may be hazards
that could affect the use and value of the property.
Compliance with laws. The seller warrants that there are no undisclosed
building code or zoning violations.
Due-on-sale clause. The parties state their understanding that loans that survive
the closing may be called due by the lender. Both parties agree to hold the other
party harmless for the consequences of an acceleration.
Seller financing disclosure. The parties agree to comply with applicable state
and local disclosure laws concerning seller financing.
Rental property; tenants rights. The buyer acknowledges the rights of tenants
following closing.
FHA or VA financing condition. A contingency allows the buyer to cancel the
contract if the price exceeds FHA or VA estimates of the property's value.
Flood plain; flood insurance. Seller discloses that the property is in a flood
plain and that it must carry flood insurance if the buyer uses certain lenders for
financing.
Condominium assessments. Seller discloses assessments the owner must pay.
Foreign seller withholding. The seller acknowledges that the buyer must
withhold 15% of the purchase price at closing if the seller is a foreign person or
entity and forward the withheld amount to the Internal Revenue Service. Certain
limitations and exemptions apply.
Chapter 14 Overview of Conveyance Contracts 203
---PAGE_BREAK---
Tax deferred exchange. For income properties only, buyer and seller disclose
their intentions to participate in an exchange and agree to cooperate in
completing necessary procedures.
Merger of agreements. Buyer and seller state that there are no other agreements
between the parties that are not expressed in the contract.
Notices. The parties agree on how they will give notice to each other and what
they will consider to be delivery of notice.
Time is of the essence. The parties agree that they can amend dates and
deadlines only if they both give written approval.
Fax transmission. The parties agree to accept facsimile transmission of the offer,
provided receipt is acknowledged and original copies of the contract are
subsequently delivered.
Survival. The parties continue to be liable for the truthfulness of representations
and warranties after the closing.
Dispute resolution. The parties agree to resolve disputes through arbitration as
opposed to court proceedings.
C.L.U.E. Report. CLUE (Comprehensive Loss Underwriting Exchange) is a
claims history database used by insurance companies in underwriting or rating
insurance policies. A CLUE Home Seller's Disclosure Report shows a five-year
insurance loss history for a specific property. Among other things, it describes the
types of any losses and the amounts paid. Many home buyers now require sellers
to provide a CLUE Report (which only the property owner or an insurer can
order) as a contingency appended to the purchase offer. A report showing no
insurance loss within the previous five years is an indication that the availability
and pricing of homeowner’s insurance will not present an obstacle to the
purchase transaction.
Addenda. Addenda to the sale contract become binding components of the
overall agreement. The most common addendum is the seller's property condition
disclosure. Examples of other addenda are:
agency disclosure asbestos / hazardous materials
liquidated damages radon disclosure
flood plain disclosure tenant's lease
204 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
OPTION-TO-BUY CONTRACT
Contract requirements
Common provisions
Legal aspects
An option-to-buy is an enforceable contract in which a potential seller, the
optionor, grants a potential buyer, the optionee, the right to purchase a property
before a stated time for a stated price and terms. In exchange for the right of
option, the optionee pays the optionor valuable consideration.
For example, a buyer wants to purchase a property for $150,000, but needs to sell
a boat to raise the down payment. The boat will take two or three months to sell.
To accommodate the buyer, the seller offers the buyer an option to purchase the
property at any time before midnight on the day that is ninety days from the date
of signing the option. The buyer pays the seller $1,000 for the option. If buyer
exercises the option, the seller will apply the $1,000 toward the earnest money
deposit and subsequent down payment. If the optionee lets the option expire, the
seller keeps the $1,000. Both parties agree to the arrangement by completing a
sale contract as an addendum to the option, then executing the option agreement
itself.
An option-to-buy places the optionee under no obligation to purchase the
property. However, the seller must perform under the terms of the contract if the
buyer exercises the option. An option is thus a unilateral agreement. Exercise of
the option creates a bilateral sale contract where both parties are bound to
perform. An unused option terminates at the expiration date.
An optionee can use an option to prevent the sale of a property to another party
while seeking to raise funds for the purchase. A renter with a lease option-to-buy
can accumulate down payment funds while paying rent to the landlord. For
example, an owner may lease a condominium to a tenant with an option to buy. If
the tenant takes the option, the landlord agrees to apply $100 of the monthly rent
paid prior to the option date toward the purchase price. The tenant pays the
landlord the nominal sum of $200 for the option.
Options can also facilitate commercial property acquisition. The option period
gives a buyer time to investigate zoning, space planning, building permits,
environmental impacts, and other feasibility issues prior to the purchase without
losing the property to another party in the meantime.
Contract
requirements To be valid and enforceable, an option-to-buy must:
 include actual, non-refundable consideration
The option must require the optionee to pay a specific
consideration that is separate from the purchase price. The
consideration cannot be refunded if the option is not exercised. If
the option is exercised, the consideration may be applied to the
Chapter 14 Overview of Conveyance Contracts 205
---PAGE_BREAK---
purchase price. If the option is a lease option, portions of the rent
may qualify as separate consideration.
 include price and terms of the sale
The price and terms of the potential transaction must be clearly
expressed and cannot change over the option period. It is
customary practice for the parties to complete and attach a sale
contract to the option as satisfaction of this requirement.
 have an expiration date
The option must automatically expire at the end of a specific
period.
 be in writing
Since a potential transfer of real estate is involved, most state
statutes of fraud require an option to be in writing.
 include a legal description
 meet general contract validity requirements
The basics include competent parties, the optionor's promise to
perform, and the optionor's signature. Note that it is not necessary
for the optionee to sign the option.
Common provisions Beyond the required elements, it is common for an option to include provisions
covering:
 how to deliver notice of election
A clause clarifies how to make the option election, exactly when
the election must be completed, and any additional terms required
such as an earnest money deposit.
 forfeiture terms
A clause provides that the optionor is entitled to the consideration if
the option term expires.
 property and title condition warranties
The optionor warrants that the property will be maintained in a
certain condition, and that title will be marketable and insurable.
206 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
 how option consideration will be credited
A clause states how the optionor will apply the option
consideration toward the purchase price.
Legal aspects Equitable interest. The optionee enjoys an equitable interest in the property
because the option creates the right to obtain legal title. However, the option does
not in itself convey an interest in real property, only a right to do something
governed by contract law.
Recording. An option should be recorded, because the equitable interest it
creates can affect the marketability of title.
Assignment. An option-to-buy is assignable unless the contract expressly
prohibits assignment.
CONTRACT FOR DEED
Interests and rights
Legal form
Default and recourse
Usage guidelines
A contract for deed is also called a land contract, an installment sale, a
conditional sales contract, and an agreement for deed. It is a bilateral agreement
between a seller, the vendor, and a buyer, the vendee, in which the vendor defers
receipt of some or all of the purchase price of a property over a specified period
of time. During the period, the vendor retains legal title and the vendee acquires
equitable title. The vendee takes possession of the property, makes stipulated
payments of principal and interest to the vendor, and otherwise fulfills
obligations as the contract requires. At the end of the period, the buyer pays the
vendor the full purchase price and the vendor deeds legal title to the vendee.
Like an option, a contract for deed offers a means for a marginally qualified
buyer to acquire property. In essence, the seller acts as lender, allowing the buyer
to take possession and pay off the purchase price over time. A buyer may thus
avoid conventional down payment and income requirements imposed by
institutional lenders. During the contract period, the buyer can work to raise the
necessary cash to complete the purchase or to qualify for a conventional
mortgage.
A contract for deed serves two primary purposes for a seller. First, it facilitates a
sale that might otherwise be impossible. Second, it may give the seller certain
tax benefits. Since the seller is not liable for capital gains tax until the purchase
price is received, the installment sale lowers the seller's tax liability in the year
of the sale.
Chapter 14 Overview of Conveyance Contracts 207
---PAGE_BREAK---
Interests and rights Vendor's rights and obligations. During the contract period, the seller may:
 mortgage the property
 sell or assign whatever interests he or she owns in the property to
another party
 incur judgment liens against the property
The vendor, however, is bound to the obligations imposed by the contract for
deed. In particular, the vendor may not breach the obligation to convey legal title
to the vendee upon receipt of the total purchase price. In addition, the vendor
remains liable for underlying mortgage loans.
Vendee's rights and obligations. During the contract period, the buyer may
occupy, use, enjoy, and profit from the property, subject to the provisions of the
written agreement. The vendee must make periodic payments of principal and
interest and maintain the property. In addition, a vendee may have to pay
property taxes and hazard insurance.
Legal form Like other conveyance contracts, a contract for deed instrument identifies:
 the principal parties
 the property's legal description
 consideration: specifically what the parties promise to do
 the terms of the sale
 obligations for property maintenance
 default and remedies
 signatures and acknowledgment
The contract specifies the vendee's payments, payment deadlines, when the
balance of the purchase price is due, and how the property may be used.
Default and recourse Seller default. If the seller defaults, such as by failing to deliver the deed, the
buyer may sue for specific performance, or for cancellation of the agreement and
damages.
Buyer default. States differ in the remedies they prescribe for the seller in case
of buyer default. Some states consider the default a breach of contract that may
be remedied by cancellation, retention of monies received, and eviction. Others
provide foreclosure proceedings as a remedy.
Usage guidelines Many areas have no standardized contract for deed or any form sanctioned by
associations and agencies. Therefore, this kind of conveyance presents certain
pitfalls for buyer and seller.
In some states, a breach of the contract for deed is remedied under local contract
law rather than foreclosure law. The buyer may not have the protections of a
redemption period or other buyer-protection laws which accompany formal
foreclosure proceedings. The vendor might sue the vendee for breach of contract
for the slightest infraction of the contract terms.
A second danger for the vendee is that the vendor has the power and the right to
encumber the property in ways that may not be desirable for the buyer. For
208 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
example, the seller could place a home equity loan on the property, then fail to
make periodic payments. The bank could then foreclose on the vendor, thus
jeopardizing the vendee's eventual purchase.
For the seller, the principal danger is that the buyer acquires possession in
exchange for a minimal down payment. A buyer might damage or even vacate
the property, leaving the seller to make repairs and retake possession. Further,
since the contract is recorded, the seller must also bear the time and expense of
clearing the title.
To minimize risk, principal parties in a contract for deed should observe the
following guidelines:
 use an attorney to draft the agreement
 adopt the standard forms, if available
 become familiar with how the contract will be enforced
 utilize professional escrow and title services
 record the transaction properly
 be prepared for the possible effect on existing financing
Chapter 14 Overview of Conveyance Contracts 209
---PAGE_BREAK---
14
Overview Of Conveyance Contracts
Snapshot Review
CONTRACT FOR SALE
Legal characteristics ● binding, bilateral contract for purchase and sale; enforceable; executory, or to be
fulfilled; expires upon closing; must be in writing; contain valuable
consideration; identify property; be signed by all; be a valid contract
Contract creation ● by unqualified acceptance of an offer; gives buyer equitable title, power to force
specific performance
Earnest money escrow ● secures contract validity and buyer's equitable interest; varies in amount; deposit
controlled by disinterested party who must act according to escrow instructions
Contract contingencies ● conditions that must be met for the contract to be enforceable
Default ● buyer may sue for cancellation and damages or for specific performance; seller
may claim deposit as liquidated damages, or may sue for cancellation, other
damages, or for specific performance
SALE CONTRACT
PROVISIONS
Primary provisions ● parties, consideration, legal description, price and terms, loan approval, earnest
money, escrow, closing and possession dates, conveyed interest, type of deed,
title evidence, property condition warranty, closing costs, damage and
destruction, default, broker's representation, commission, seller's representations
Secondary provisions ● inspections, owner's association disclosure, survey, environmental hazards,
compliance with laws, due-on-sale, seller financing disclosure, rental property
tenant's rights, FHA or VA financing condition, flood plain and flood insurance,
condominium assessments, foreign seller withholding, tax-deferred exchange,
merger of agreements, notices, time of the essence, fax transmission, survival,
dispute resolution, addenda
THE OPTION-TO-BUY
CONTRACT ● optionor gives option to optionee; unilateral contract: seller must perform; buyer
need not; if option exercised, option becomes bilateral sale contract
Contract requirements ● must include: non-refundable consideration for the option right; price and terms
of the sale; option period expiration date; legal description; must be in writing
and meet contract validity requirements
Common clause
provisions ● special provisions: how to exercise option; terms of option money forfeiture; how
option money will be applied to purchase price
Legal aspects ● creates equitable interest; is assignable; should be recorded
CONTRACT FOR DEED ● purchase price is paid over time in installments; seller retains title; buyer takes
possession; at end of period, buyer pays balance of price, gets legal title
Interests and rights ● seller may encumber or assign interest; remains liable for underlying mortgage
● buyer may use, possess, profit; must make periodic payments, maintain the
property, and purchase at end of term
Default and recourse ● if seller defaults, buyer may sue for cancellation and damages or specific
performance; seller's default remedies vary by area; may sue for specific
performance or damages, or may need to foreclose
210 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama