16
Appraising and Estimating
16
Market Value
Real Estate Value
Appraising Market Value
The Sales Comparison Approach
The Cost Approach
The Income Capitalization Approach
Regulation of Appraisal Practice
REAL ESTATE VALUE
Foundations of real estate value
Types of value
The valuation of real property is one of the most fundamental activities in the real
estate business. Its role is particularly critical in the transfer of real property,
since the value of a parcel establishes the general price range for the principal
parties to negotiate.
Real estate value in general is the present monetary worth of benefits arising
from the ownership of real estate. The primary benefits that contribute to real
estate value are:
 income
 appreciation
 use
 tax benefits
Ownership of real estate produces income when there are leases on the land, the
improvements, or on air, surface, or subsurface rights. Such income is part of real
estate value because an investor will pay money to buy the income stream
generated by ownership of the property.
Appreciation is an increase in the market value of a parcel of land over time,
usually resulting from a general rise in sale prices of real estate throughout a
market area. Such an increase, whether actual or projected, is another investment
benefit that contributes to real estate value.
The way a property is used -- whether residential, commercial, agricultural,
recreational, etc. -- in large part determines the property's value. Each kind of use
has its own benefits.
Chapter 16: Appraising and Estimating Market Value 223
---PAGE_BREAK---
Depending on current tax law, tax benefits from ownership of a property may
take the form of preferred treatment of capital gain, tax losses, depreciation, and
deferrals of tax liability. These tax benefits contribute to the income and potential
sale price of a property.
Foundations of real
estate value A number of economic forces interact in the marketplace to contribute to real
estate value. Among the most recognized of these principles are those listed
below.
Exhibit 16.1 Economic Principles Underlying Real Estate Value
supply and demand change
utility transferability highest and best use
anticipation substitution conformity
contribution progression and regression
assemblage
subdivision
Supply and demand. The availability of certain properties interacts with the
strength of the demand for those properties to establish prices. When demand for
properties exceeds supply, a condition of scarcity exists, and real estate values
rise. When supply exceeds demand, a condition of surplus exists, and real estate
values decline. When supply and demand are generally equivalent, the market is
considered to be in balance, and real estate values stabilize.
Utility. The fact that a property has a use in a certain marketplace contributes to
the demand for it. Use is not the same as function. For instance, a swampy area
may have an ecological function as a wetland, but it may have no economic utility
if it cannot be put to some use that people in the marketplace are willing to pay
for.
Transferability. How readily or easily title or rights to real estate can be
transferred affects the property's value. Property that is encumbered has a value
impairment since buyers do not want unmarketable title. Similarly, property that
cannot be transferred due to disputes among owners may cause the value to
decline, because the investment is wholly illiquid until the disputes are resolved.
Anticipation. The benefits a buyer expects to derive from a property over a
holding period influence what the buyer is willing to pay for it. For example, if
an investor anticipates an annual rental income from a leased property to be one
million dollars, this expected sum has a direct bearing on what the investor will
pay for the property.
Substitution. According to the principle of substitution, a buyer will pay no more
for a property than the buyer would have to pay for an equally desirable and
available substitute property. For example, if three houses for sale are essentially
similar in size, quality and location, a potential buyer is unlikely to choose the
one that is priced significantly higher than the other two.
Contribution. The principal of contribution focuses on the degree to which a
particular improvement affects market value of the overall property. In essence,
the contribution of the improvement is equal to the change in market value that
the addition of the improvement causes. For example, adding a bathroom to a
house may contribute an additional $15,000 to the appraised value. Thus the
contribution of the bathroom is $15,000. Note that an improvement's contribution
224 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
to value has little to do with the improvement's cost. The foregoing bathroom
may have cost $5,000 or $20,000. Contribution is what the market recognizes as
the change in value, not what an item cost. If continuous improvements are added
to a property, it is possible that, at some point, the cost of adding improvements
to a property no longer contributes a corresponding increase in the value of the
property. When this occurs, the property suffers from diminishing marginal
return, where the costs to improve exceed contribution.
Change. Market conditions are in a state of flux over time, just as the condition
of a property itself changes. These fluctuations and changes will affect the
benefits that can arise from the property, and should be reflected in an estimate of
the property's value. For example, the construction of a neighborhood shopping
center in the vicinity of a certain house may increase the desirability of the
house's location, and hence, its value.
Highest and best use. This principle holds that there is, theoretically, a single
use for a property that produces the greatest income and return. A property
achieves its maximum value when it is put to this use. If the actual use is not the
highest and best use, the value of the property is correspondingly less than
optimal. Technically, highest and best use must be legally permissible, physically
possible, financially feasible, and maximally productive.
For example, a property with an old house on it may not be in its highest and best
use if it is surrounded by retail properties. If zoning permits the property to be
converted to a retail use, its highest and best use may well be retail rather than
residential.
Conformity. This principle holds that a property's maximal value is attained
when its form and use are in tune with surrounding properties and uses. For
example, a two-bedroom, one-bathroom house surrounded by four-bedroom,
three-bathroom homes may derive maximal value from a room addition.
Progression and regression. The value of a property influences, and is
influenced by, the values of neighboring properties. If a property is surrounded
by properties with higher values, its value will tend to rise (progression); if it is
surrounded by properties with lower values, its value will tend to fall
(regression).
Assemblage. Assemblage, or the conjoining of adjacent properties, sometimes
creates a combined value that is greater than the values of the unassembled
properties. The excess value created by assemblage is called plottage value.
Subdivision. The division of a single property into smaller properties can also
result in a higher total value. For instance, a one-acre suburban site appraised at
$50,000 may be subdivided into four quarter-acre lots worth $30,000 each. This
principle contributes significantly to the financial feasibility of subdivision
development.
Types of value The purpose of an appraisal influences an estimate of the value of a parcel of real
estate. This is because there are different types of value related to different
appraisal purposes. Some of the possibilities are listed below.
Chapter 16: Appraising and Estimating Market Value 225
---PAGE_BREAK---
Exhibit 16.2 Types of Real Estate Value
market reversionary
reproduction appraised
replacement rental
salvage leasehold
plottage insured
assessed book
condemned mortgage
Market value. Market value is an estimate of the price at which a property will
sell at a particular time. This type of value is the one generally sought in
appraisals and used in brokers' estimates of value.
Reproduction value. Reproduction value is the value based on the cost of
constructing a precise duplicate of the subject property's improvements, assuming
current construction costs.
Replacement value. Replacement value is the value based on the cost of
constructing a functional equivalent of the subject property's improvements,
assuming current construction costs.
Salvage value. Salvage value refers to the nominal value of a property that has
reached the end of its economic life. Salvage value is also an estimate of the price
at which a structure will sell if it is dismantled and moved.
Plottage value. Plottage value is an estimate of the value that the process of
assemblage adds to the combined values of the assembled properties.
Assessed value. Assessed value is the value of a property as estimated by a
taxing authority as the basis for ad valorem taxation.
Condemned value. Condemned value is the value set by a county or municipal
authority for a property which may be taken by eminent domain.
Depreciated value. Depreciated value is a value established by subtracting
accumulated depreciation from the purchase price of a property.
Reversionary value. Reversionary value is the estimated selling price of a
property at some time in the future. This value is used most commonly in a
proforma investment analysis where, at the end of a holding period, the property
is sold and the investor's capital reverts to the investor.
Appraised value. Appraised value is an appraiser's opinion of a property's value.
Rental value. Rental value is an estimate of the rental rate a property can
command for a specific period of time.
Leasehold value. Leasehold value is an estimate of the market value of a lessee's
interest in a property.
Insured value. Insured value is the face amount a casualty or hazard insurance
policy will pay in case a property is rendered unusable.
226 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
Book value. Book value is the value of the property as carried on the accounts of
the owner. The value is generally equal to the acquisition price plus capital
improvements minus accumulated depreciation.
Mortgage value. Mortgage value is the value of the property as collateral for a
loan.
APPRAISING MARKET VALUE
Market value
The appraisal and its uses
Measuring living area
Steps in the appraisal process
Market value Market value is an opinion of the price that a willing seller and willing buyer would
probably agree on for a property at a given time if:
 the transaction is a cash transaction
 the property is exposed on the open market for a reasonable period
 buyer and seller have full information about market conditions and
about potential uses
 there is no abnormal pressure on either party to complete the
transaction
 buyer and seller are not related (it is an "arm's length" transaction)
 title is marketable and conveyable by the seller
 the price is a "normal consideration," that is, it does not include
hidden influences such as special financing deals, concessions,
terms, services, fees, credits, costs, or other types of consideration.
Another way of describing market value is that it is the highest price that a buyer
would pay and the lowest price that the seller would accept for the property.
The market price, as opposed to market value, is what a property actually sells
for. Market price should theoretically be the same as market value if all the
conditions essential for market value were present. Market price, however, may
not reflect the analysis of comparables and of investment value that an estimate
of market value includes.
The appraisal
and its uses While most appraisals seek to estimate market value, any of the types of value
described earlier may be the objective of an appraisal. An appraisal is
distinguished from other estimates of value in that it is an opinion of value
supported by data and performed by a professional, disinterested third party.
Appraisers acting in a professional capacity are also regulated by state laws and
bound to standards set by the appraisal industry.
Broker's opinion of value. A broker's opinion of value may resemble an
appraisal, but it differs from an appraisal in that it is not necessarily performed by
a disinterested third party or licensed professional and it generally uses only a
Chapter 16: Appraising and Estimating Market Value 227
---PAGE_BREAK---
limited form of one of the three appraisal approaches. In addition, the opinion is
not subject to regulation, nor does it follow any particular professional standards.
Uses. The appraisal itself is used in real estate decision-making to estimate one or
more types of value, depending on the kind of decision to be made. Appraisals
may be ordered and used by mortgage lenders, government agencies, investors,
utilities companies, and real estate buyers and sellers.
An appraisal helps in setting selling prices and rental rates, determining the level
of insurance coverage, establishing investment values, and establishing the value
of the real estate as collateral for a loan.
Appraisals may be developed and reported in a narrative format or on a
prescribed form with attachments. The most commonly used form for residential
appraisals is the "Uniform Residential Appraisal Report" (URAR) promoted by
the Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA) and Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC) (known as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
respectively).
Measuring living
area The concept of living area is fundamental to estimating residential property
value, since a subject's living area is a major component of its desirability and
market value. But what is living area, and how is it measured? Standards differ
from state to state.
ANSI and Fannie Mae standards. ANSI (American National Standards
Institute) and Fannie Mae are the two most prominent organizations which
originate and propound modern measuring standards in national real estate
practice. Current living area measurement standards can be found in ANSI and
Fannie Mae literature. The following guidelines are general and not intended to
be rigid or comprehensive. Practitioners must always be aware of and follow
local measurement standards..
The principal ANSI and Fannie Mae standards for measuring gross living area
(GLA) include the following. These standards mainly apply to single-family
residential properties.
1. Gross living area is based on the dimensions of all rooms "above grade" as
measured from the exterior walls of the premises, including stairwells but
excluding "open areas." Space should be measured to the inch or to 1/10th of
a foot and living areas calculated and totaled.
2. Above grade is defined as above the surface of the ground. Living area
below-grade (one foot or more) must be counted as basement area – thus not
as 100% living area.
3. Minimum ceiling height for living area is 7 feet. In two-story properties (or
more) with sloped ceilings, at least 50% of the ceiling area must have a
height of 7 feet or more.
4. Finished space: To be counted in GLA footage, a space must be finished,
i.e., have a floor covering and a ceiling. Entry areas may be counted, but
seasonal porches are excluded.
228 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
5. Under heat and attached: Countable living area must be heated. In
addition, it must be attached to the main house itself. For example, an
unattached outbuilding cannot be counted in the total.
6. Attics and basements: Partially finished or only partially heated areas may
not be counted as 100% GLA footage. Since these standards can vary widely
from state to state, practitioners should ascertain the local standards that
apply.
7. Garage areas are not fully countable if they are unattached, or attached but
not heated. However, they may meet a local standard if fully heated, finished
and improved for other household uses.
8. Stairs and closets: Both these improvement areas are generally fully
countable in GLA.
Ultimately, the most accurate measurement of living areas relies heavily on
adherence to local standards and practices, and to practices dictated by mortgage
underwriters.
Steps in the
appraisal process A systematic procedure enables an appraiser to collect, organize and analyze the
necessary data to produce an appraisal report.
Exhibit 16.3 Steps in the Appraisal Process
1. Identify the purpose
2. Assimilate relevant data
3. Assess the highest and best use
4. Estimate the value of the land
5. Apply the three approaches to
estimating value
6. Reconcile the values from the
approaches
7. Compile the report
Purpose. The first step in the process is to define the appraisal problem and the
purpose of the appraisal. This involves
 identifying the subject property by legal description
 specifying the interest to be appraised
 specifying the purpose of the appraisal, for example, to identify
market value for a purchase, identify rental levels, or establish a
value as collateral for a loan
 specifying the date for which the appraisal is valid
 identifying the type of value to be estimated
Data. The second step is to collect, organize and analyze relevant data about the
subject property. Information relevant to the property includes notes and drawings
from physical inspection of the subject, public tax and title records, and
reproduction costs. Relevant information about the market includes
environmental, demographic, and economic reports concerning the neighborhood,
community, and region.
Chapter 16: Appraising and Estimating Market Value 229
---PAGE_BREAK---
Highest and best use. The third step is to analyze market conditions to identify
the most profitable use for the subject property. This use may or may not be the
existing use.
Land value. The fourth step is to estimate the land value of the subject. An
appraiser does this by comparing the subject site, but not its buildings, with
similar sites in the area, and making adjustments for significant differences.
Three approaches. The fifth step is to apply the three basic approaches to value
to the subject: the sales comparison approach, the cost approach, and the income
capitalization approach. Using multiple methods serves to guard against errors
and to set a range of values for the final estimate.
Reconciliation. The sixth step is to reconcile the value estimates produced by the
three approaches to value into a final value estimate. To do this, an appraiser
must
 weigh the appropriateness of a particular approach to the type of
property being appraised
 take into account the quality and quantity of data obtained in each
method
Report. The final step is to present the estimate of value in the format requested
by the client.
THE SALES COMPARISON APPROACH
Steps in the approach
Identifying comparables
Adjusting comparables
Weighting comparables
Broker's comparative market analysis
The sales comparison approach, also known as the market data approach, is used
for almost all properties. It also serves as the basis for a broker's opinion of value.
It is based on the principle of substitution-- that a buyer will pay no more for the
subject property than would be sufficient to purchase a comparable property--
and contribution-- that specific characteristics add value to a property.
The sales comparison approach is widely used because it takes into account the
subject property's specific amenities in relation to competing properties. In
addition, because of the currency of its data, the approach incorporates present
market realities.
The sales comparison approach is limited in that every property is unique. As a
result, it is difficult to find good comparables, especially for special-purpose
properties. In addition, the market must be active; otherwise, sale prices lack
currency and reliability.
230 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
Steps in
the approach The sales comparison approach consists of comparing sale prices of recently sold
properties that are comparable with the subject and making dollar adjustments to
the price of each comparable to account for competitive differences with the
subject. After identifying the adjusted value of each comparable, the appraiser
weights the reliability of each comparable and the factors underlying how the
adjustments were made. The weighting yields a final value range based on the
most reliable factors in the analysis.
Exhibit 16.4 Steps in the Sales Comparison Approach
1. Identify comparable sales.
2. Compare comparables to the subject and
make adjustments to comparables.
3. Weight values indicated by adjusted
comparables for the final value estimate of the
subject.
Identifying
comparables To qualify as a comparable, a property must:
 resemble the subject in size, shape, design, utility and location
 have sold recently, generally within six months of the appraisal
 have sold in an arm's-length transaction
An appraiser considers three to six comparables, and usually includes at least
three in the appraisal report.
Appraisers have specific guidelines within the foregoing criteria for selecting
comparables, many of which are set by secondary market organizations such as
FNMA. For example, to qualify as a comparable for a mortgage loan appraisal, a
property might have to be located within one mile of the subject. Or perhaps the
size of the comparable must be within a certain percentage of improved area in
relation to the subject.
The time-of-sale criterion is important because transactions that occurred too far
in the past will not reflect appreciation or recent changes in market conditions.
An arm's length sale involves objective, disinterested parties who are presumed to
have negotiated a market price for the property. If the sale of a house occurred
between a father and a daughter, for example, one might assume that the
transaction did not reflect market value.
Principal sources of data for generating the sales comparison are tax records, title
records, and the local multiple listing service.
Chapter 16: Appraising and Estimating Market Value 231
---PAGE_BREAK---
Adjusting
comparables The appraiser adjusts the sale prices of the comparables to account for
competitive differences with the subject property. Note that the sale prices of the
comparables are known, while the value and price of the subject are not.
Therefore, adjustments can be made only to the comparables' prices, not to the
subject's. Adjustments are made to the comparables in the form of a value
deduction or a value addition.
Adding or deducting value. If the comparable is better than the subject in some
characteristic, an amount is deducted from the sale price of the comparable. This
neutralizes the comparable's competitive advantage in an adjustment category.
For example, a comparable has a swimming pool and the subject does not. To
equalize the difference, the appraiser deducts an amount, say $6,000, from the
sale price of the comparable. Note that the adjustment reflects the contribution of
the swimming pool to market value. The adjustment amount is not the cost of the
pool or its depreciated value.
If the comparable is inferior to the subject in some characteristic, an amount is
added to the price of the comparable. This adjustment equalizes the subject's
competitive advantage in this area.
Adjustment criteria. The principal factors for comparison and adjustment are
time of sale, location, physical characteristics, and transaction characteristics.
 time of sale
An adjustment may be made if market conditions, market prices,
or financing availability have changed significantly since the date
of the comparable's sale. Most often, this adjustment is to account
for appreciation.
 location
An adjustment may be made if there are differences between the
comparable's location and the subject's, including neighborhood
desirability and appearance, zoning restrictions, and general price
levels.
 physical characteristics
Adjustments may be made for marketable differences between the
comparable's and subject's lot size, square feet of livable area (or
other appropriate measure for the property type), number of
rooms, layout, age, condition, construction type and quality,
landscaping, and special amenities.
 transaction characteristics
An adjustment may be made for such differences as mortgage
loan terms, mortgage assumability, and owner financing.
232 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
Weighting
comparables Adding and subtracting the appropriate adjustments to the sale price of each
comparable results in an adjusted price for the comparables that indicates the
value of the subject. The last step in the approach is to perform a weighted
analysis of the indicated values of each comparable. The appraiser, in other
words, must identify which comparable values are more indicative of the subject
and which are less indicative.
An appraiser primarily relies on experience and judgment to weight comparables.
There is no formula for selecting a value from within the range of all
comparables analyzed. However, there are three quantitative guidelines: the total
number of adjustments; the amount of a single adjustment; and the net value
change of all adjustments.
As a rule, the fewer the total number of adjustments, the smaller the adjustment
amounts, and the less the total adjustment amount, the more reliable the
comparable.
Number of adjustments. In terms of total adjustments, the comparable with the
fewest adjustments tends to be most similar to the subject, hence the best
indicator of value. If a comparable requires excessive adjustments, it is
increasingly less reliable as an indicator of value. The underlying rationale is that
there is a margin of error involved in making any adjustment. Whenever a
number of adjustments must be made, the margin of error compounds. By the
time six or seven adjustments are made, the margin becomes significant, and the
reliability of the final value estimate is greatly reduced.
Single adjustment amounts. The dollar amount of an adjustment represents the
variance between the subject and the comparable for a given item. If a large
adjustment is called for, the comparable becomes less of an indicator of value.
The smaller the adjustment, the better the comparable is as an indicator of value.
If an appraisal is performed for mortgage qualification, the appraiser may be
restricted from making adjustments in excess of a certain amount, for example,
anything in excess of 10-15% of the sale price of the comparable. If such an
adjustment would be necessary, the property is no longer considered comparable.
Total net adjustment amount. The third reliability factor in weighting
comparables is the total net value change of all adjustments added together. If a
comparable's total adjustments alter the indicated value only slightly, the
comparable is a good indicator of value. If total adjustments create a large dollar
amount between the sale price and the adjusted value, the comparable is a poorer
indicator of value. Fannie Mae, for instance, will not accept the use of a
comparable where total net adjustments are in excess of 15% of the sale price.
For example, an appraiser is considering a property that sold for $500,000 as a
comparable. After all adjustments are made, the indicated value of the
comparable is $605,000, a 21% difference in the comparable's sale price. This
property, if allowed at all, would be a weak indicator of value.
Chapter 16: Appraising and Estimating Market Value 233
---PAGE_BREAK---
Broker's comparative
market analysis A broker or salesperson who is attempting to establish a listing price or range of
prices for a property uses a scaled-down version of the appraiser's sales
comparison approach called a comparative market analysis, or CMA (also called
a competitive market analysis). While the CMA serves a useful purpose in
setting general price ranges, brokers and agents need to exercise caution in
presenting a CMA as an appraisal, which it is not. Two important distinctions
between the two are objectivity and comprehensiveness.
First, the broker is not unbiased: he or she is motivated by the desire to obtain a
listing, which can lead one to distort the estimated price. Secondly, the broker's
CMA is not comprehensive: the broker does not usually consider the full range
of data about market conditions and comparable sales that the appraiser must
consider and document. Therefore, the broker's opinion will be less reliable than
the appraiser's.
The following exhibit illustrates the sales comparison approach. An appraiser is
estimating market value for a certain house. Four comparables are adjusted to
find an indicated value for the subject. The grid which follows the property and
market data shows the appraiser's adjustments for the differences between the
four comparables and the subject.
For practice with the sales comparison approach, see the exercise on page 411 in
the math chapter.
234 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
Exhibit 16.5 Sales Comparison Approach Illustration
Data
Subject property: 8 rooms-- 3 bedrooms, two baths, kitchen, living room, family room; 2,000 square
feet of gross living area; 2-car attached garage; landscaping is good. Construction
is frame with aluminum siding.
Comparable A: Sold for 1,000,000 within previous month; conventional financing at current rates;
located in subject's neighborhood with similar locational advantages; house
approximately same age as subject; lot size smaller than subject; view similar to
subject; design less appealing than subject's; construction similar to subject;
condition similar to subject; 7 rooms-- two bedrooms, one bath; 1,900 square feet
of gross living area; 2-car attached garage; landscaping similar to subject.
Comparable B: Sold for 1,200,000 within previous month; conventional financing at current rates;
located in subject's neighborhood with similar locational advantages; house six
years newer than subject; lot size smaller than subject; view is better than the
subject’s; design is more appealing than subject's; construction (brick and frame)
better than subject's; better condition than subject; 10 rooms-four bedrooms, three
baths; 2,300 square feet of gross living area; 2-car attached garage; landscaping
similar to subject.
Comparable C: Sold for 1,150,000 within previous month; conventional financing at current rates;
located in subject's neighborhood with similar locational advantages; house five
years older than subject; lot size larger than subject; view similar to subject;
design and appeal similar to subject's; construction similar to subject; condition
similar to subject; 8 rooms-- three bedrooms, two baths; 2,000 square feet of gross
living area; 2-car attached garage; landscaping similar to subject.
Comparable D: Sold for 1,090,000 within previous month; conventional financing at current rates;
located in a neighborhood close to subject's, but more desirable than subject's;
house approximately same age as subject; lot size same as subject; view similar to
subject; design less appealing than subject's; construction (frame) poorer than
subject's; poorer condition than subject; 7 rooms-- two bedrooms, one and one half
baths; 1,900 square feet of gross living area; 2-car attached garage; landscaping
similar to subject.
Chapter 16: Appraising and Estimating Market Value 235
---PAGE_BREAK---
Exhibit 16.5, cont. Sales Comparison Approach Illustration
Adjustments
Subject A B C D
Sale price 1,000,000 1,200,000 1,150,000 1,090,000
Financing terms standard standard standard standard
Sale date NOW equal equal equal equal
Location equal equal equal -20,000
Age equal -12,000 +10,000 equal
Lot size +10,000 +10,000 -10,000 equal
Site/view equal -10,000 equal equal
Design/appeal +10,000 -12,000 equal +5,000
Construction quality good equal -30,000 equal +10,000
Condition good equal -50,000 equal +20,000
No. of rooms 8
No. of bedrooms 3 +5,000 -5,000 equal +5,000
No. of baths 2 +10,000 -15,000 equal +5,000
Gross living area 2,000 +10,000 -20,000 equal +10,000
Other space
Garage 2 car/attd. equal equal equal equal
Other
improvements
Landscaping good equal equal equal equal
Net adjustments +45,000 -144,000 0 +35,000
Indicated value 1,120,000 1,045,000 1,056,000 1,150,000 1,125,000
For comparable A, the appraiser has made additions to the lot value, design,
number of bedrooms and baths, and for gross living area. This accounts for the
comparable's deficiencies in these areas relative to the subject. A total of five
adjustments amount to $45,000, or 4.5% of the purchase price.
For comparable B, the appraiser has deducted values for age, site, design,
construction quality, condition, bedrooms, baths, and living area. This accounts
for the comparable's superior qualities relative to the subject. The only addition is
236 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
the lot size, since the subject's is larger. A total of nine adjustments amount to
$144,000, or 12% of the sale price.
For comparable C, the appraiser has added value for the age and deducted value
for the lot size. The two adjustments offset one another for a net adjustment of
zero.
For comparable D, one deduction has been made for the comparable's superior
location. This is offset by six additions reflecting the various areas where the
comparable is inferior to the subject. A total of seven adjustments amount to
$35,000, or 3.2% of the sale price.
In view of all adjusted comparables, the appraiser developed a final indication of
value of $1,120,000 for the subject. Underlying this conclusion is the fact that
Comparable C, since it only has two minor adjustments which offset each other,
it is by far the best indicator of value. Comparable D might be the second best
indicator, since the net adjustments are very close to the sale price. Comparable
A might be the third best indicator, since it has the second fewest number of total
adjustments. Comparable B is the least reliable indicator, since there are
numerous adjustments, three of which are of a significant amount. In addition,
Comparable B is questionable altogether as a comparable, since total adjustments
alter the sale price by 12%.
THE COST APPROACH
Types of cost appraised
Depreciation
Steps in the approach
The cost approach is most often used for recently built properties where the
actual costs of development and construction are known. It is also used for
special-purpose buildings which cannot be valued by the other methods because
of lack of comparable sales or income data.
The strengths of the cost approach are that it:
 provides an upper limit for the subject's value based on the
undepreciated cost of reproducing the improvements
 is very accurate for a property with new improvements which are
the highest and best use of the property.
The limitations of the cost approach are that:
 the cost to create improvements is not necessarily the same as
market value
 depreciation is difficult to measure, especially for older buildings
Chapter 16: Appraising and Estimating Market Value 237
---PAGE_BREAK---
Types of cost
appraised The cost approach generally aims to estimate either the reproduction cost or the
replacement cost of the subject property.
Reproduction cost is the cost of constructing, at current prices, a precise
duplicate of the subject improvements. Replacement cost is the cost of
constructing, at current prices and using current materials and methods, a
functional equivalent of the subject improvements.
Replacement cost is used primarily for appraising older structures, since it is
impractical to consider reproducing outmoded features and materials. However,
reproduction cost is preferable whenever possible because it facilitates the
calculation of depreciation on a structure.
Depreciation A cornerstone of the cost approach is the concept of depreciation. Depreciation is
the loss of value in an improvement over time. Since land is assumed to retain its
value indefinitely, depreciation only applies to the improved portion of real
property. The loss of an improvement's value can come from any cause, such as
deterioration, obsolescence, or changes in the neighborhood. The sum of
depreciation from all causes is accrued depreciation.
An appraiser considers depreciation as having three causes: physical
deterioration, functional obsolescence, and economic obsolescence.
Physical deterioration. Physical deterioration is wear and tear from use, decay,
and structural deterioration. Such deterioration may be either curable or
incurable.
Curable deterioration occurs when the costs of repair of the item are less than or
equal to the resulting increase in the property's value. For example, if a paint job
costs $6,000, and the resulting value increase is $8,000, the deterioration is
considered curable. Incurable deterioration is the opposite: the repair will cost
more than can be recovered by its contribution to the value of the building. For
example, if the foregoing paint job cost $10,000, the deterioration would be
considered incurable.
Functional obsolescence. Functional obsolescence occurs when a property has
outmoded physical or design features which are no longer desirable to current
users. If the obsolescence is curable, the cost of replacing or redesigning the
outmoded feature would be offset by the contribution to overall value, for
example, a lack of central air conditioning. If the functional obsolescence is
incurable, the cost of the cure would exceed the contribution to overall value, for
example, a floor layout with a bad traffic pattern that would cost three times as
much as the ending contribution to value.
Economic obsolescence. Economic (or external) obsolescence is the loss of
value due to adverse changes in the surroundings of the subject property that
make the subject less desirable. Since such changes are usually beyond the
control of the property owner, economic obsolescence is considered an incurable
value loss. Examples of economic obsolescence include a deteriorating
neighborhood, a rezoning of adjacent properties, or the bankruptcy of a large
employer.
238 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
Steps in the approach The cost approach consists of estimating the value of the land "as if vacant;"
estimating the cost of improvements; estimating and deducting accrued
depreciation; and adding the estimated land value to the estimated depreciated
cost of the improvements.
Exhibit 16.6 Steps in the Cost Approach
1. Estimate land value.
2. Estimate reproduction or replacement cost of
improvements.
3. Estimate accrued depreciation.
4. Subtract accrued depreciation from
reproduction or replacement cost.
5. Add land value to depreciated reproduction or
replacement cost.
Estimate land value. To estimate land value, the appraiser uses the sales
comparison method: find properties which are comparable to the subject property
in terms of land and adjust the sale prices of the comparables to account for
competitive differences with the subject property. Common adjustments concern
location, physical characteristics, and time of sale. The indicated values of the
comparable properties are used to estimate the land value of the subject. The
implicit assumption is that the subject land is vacant (unimproved) and available
for the highest and best use.
Estimate reproduction or replacement cost of improvements. There are
several methods for estimating the reproduction or replacement cost of
improvements. These are as follows.
 unit comparison method (square-foot method)
The appraiser examines one or more new structures that are similar
to the subject's improvements, determines a cost per unit for the
benchmark structures, and multiplies this cost per unit times the
number of units in the subject. The unit of measurement is most
commonly denominated in square feet.
 unit-in-place method
The appraiser uses materials cost manuals and estimates of labor
costs, overhead, and builder's profit to estimate the cost of
constructing separate components of the subject. The overall cost
estimate is the sum of the estimated costs of individual
components.
 quantity survey method
The appraiser considers in detail all materials, labor, supplies,
overhead and profit to get an accurate estimate of the actual cost
to build the improvement. More thorough than the unit-in-place
Chapter 16: Appraising and Estimating Market Value 239
---PAGE_BREAK---
method, this method is used less by appraisers than it is by engineers
and architects.
 cost indexing method
The original cost of constructing the improvement is updated by
applying a percentage increase factor to account for increases in
nominal costs over time.
Estimate accrued depreciation. Accrued depreciation is often estimated by the
straight-line method, also called the economic age-life method. This method
assumes that depreciation occurs at a steady rate over the economic life of the
structure. Therefore, a property suffers the same incremental loss of value each
year.
The economic life is the period during which the structure is expected to remain
useful in its original use. The cost of the structure is divided by the number of
years of economic life to determine an annual amount for depreciation. The
straight-line method is primarily relevant to depreciation from physical
deterioration.
Subtract accrued depreciation from reproduction or replacement cost. The
sum of accrued depreciation from all sources is subtracted from the estimated
cost of reproducing or replacing the structure. This produces an estimate of the
current value of the improvements.
Add land value to depreciated reproduction or replacement cost. To
complete the cost approach, the estimated value of the land "as if vacant" is
added to the estimated value of the depreciated reproduction or replacement cost
of the improvements. This yields the final value estimate for the property by the
cost approach.
240 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
Exhibit 16.7 Cost Approach Illustration
I. LAND VALUE
Land value, by direct sales comparison 80,000
II. IMPROVEMENTS COST
Main building (by one or more of the four methods) 260,000
Plus: other structures 16,000
Total cost new 276,000
III. ACCRUED DEPRECIATION
Physical depreciation
Curable 10,000
Incurable 14,000
Functional obsolescence 6,000
External obsolescence _____
Total depreciation 30,000
IV. IMPROVEMENTS COST MINUS DEPRECIATION
Total cost new 276,000
Less: total depreciation 30,000
Depreciated value of improvements 246,000
V. OVERALL ESTIMATED VALUE
Total land value 80,000
Depreciated value of improvements 246,000
Indicated value by cost approach 326,000
THE INCOME CAPITALIZATION APPROACH
Steps in the approach
Gross rent and gross income multiplier approach
The income capitalization approach, or income approach, is used for income
properties and sometimes for other properties in a rental market where the
appraiser can find rental data. The approach is based on the principle of
anticipation: the expected future income stream of a property underlies what an
investor will pay for the property. It is also based on the principle of substitution:
that an investor will pay no more for a subject property with a certain income
stream than the investor would have to pay for another property with a similar
income stream.
Chapter 16: Appraising and Estimating Market Value 241
---PAGE_BREAK---
The strength of the income approach is that it is used by investors themselves to
determine how much they should pay for a property. Thus, in the right
circumstances, it provides a good basis for estimating market value.
The income capitalization approach is limited in two ways. First, it is difficult to
determine an appropriate capitalization rate. This is often a matter of judgment
and experience on the part of the appraiser. Secondly, the income approach relies
on market information about income and expenses, and it can be difficult to find
such information.
Steps in the approach The income capitalization method consists of estimating annual net operating
income from the subject property, then applying a capitalization rate to the
income. This produces a principal amount that the investor would pay for the
property.
Exhibit 16.8 Steps in the Income Capitalization Approach
1. Estimate potential gross income.
2. Estimate effective gross income.
3. Estimate net operating income.
4. Select a capitalization rate.
5. Apply the capitalization rate.
Estimate potential gross income. Potential gross income is the scheduled rent of
the subject plus income from miscellaneous sources such as vending machines
and telephones. Scheduled rent is the total rent a property will produce if fully
leased at the established rental rates.
Scheduled rent
+ Other income
Potential gross income
An appraiser may estimate potential gross rental income using current market
rental rates (market rent), the rent specified by leases in effect on the property
(contract rent), or a combination of both. Market rent is determined by market
studies in a process similar to the sales comparison method. Contract rent is used
primarily if the existing leases are not due to expire in the short term and the
tenants are unlikely to fail or leave the lease.
Estimate effective gross income. Effective gross income is potential gross
income minus an allowance for vacancy and credit losses.
Potential gross income
- Vacancy & credit losses
Effective gross income
242 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
Vacancy loss refers to an amount of potential income lost because of unrented
space. Credit loss refers to an amount lost because of tenants' failure to pay rent
for any reason. Both are estimated on the basis of the subject property's history,
comparable properties in the market, and assuming typical management quality.
The allowance for vacancy and credit loss is usually estimated as a percentage of
potential gross income.
Estimate net operating income. Net operating income is effective gross income
minus total operating expenses.
Effective gross income
- Total operating expenses
Net operating income
Operating expenses include fixed expenses and variable expenses. Fixed
expenses are those that are incurred whether the property is occupied or vacant,
for example, real estate taxes and hazard insurance. Variable expenses are those
that relate to actual operation of the building, for example, utilities, janitorial
service, management, and repairs.
Operating expenses typically include an annual reserve fund for replacement of
equipment and other items that wear out periodically, such as carpets and heating
systems. Operating expenses do not include debt service, expenditures for capital
improvements, or expenses not related to operation of the property.
Select a capitalization rate. The capitalization rate is an estimate of the rate of
return an investor will demand on the investment of capital in a property such as
the subject. The judgment and market knowledge of the appraiser play an
essential role in the selection of an appropriate rate for the subject property. In
most cases, the appraiser will research capitalization rates used on similar
properties in the market.
Apply the capitalization rate. An appraiser now obtains an indication of value
from the income capitalization method by dividing the estimated net operating
income for the subject by the selected capitalization rate
𝑁𝑂𝐼
=𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒
𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒
Using traditional symbols for income (I), rate (R) and value (V), the formula for
value is
I
----- = V
R
Chapter 16: Appraising and Estimating Market Value 243
---PAGE_BREAK---
Exhibit 16.9 Income Capitalization Method Illustration
I. ESTIMATE POTENTIAL GROSS INCOME
Potential gross rental income 192,000
Plus: other income 2,000
Potential gross income 194,000
II. ESTIMATE EFFECTIVE GROSS INCOME
Less: vacancy and collection losses 9,600
Effective gross income 184,400
III. ESTIMATE NET OPERATING INCOME
Operating expenses
Real estate taxes 32,000
Insurance 4,400
Utilities 12,000
Repairs 4,000
Maintenance 16,000
Management 12,000
Reserves 1,600
Legal and accounting 2,000
Total expenses 84,000
Effective gross income 184,400
Less: total expenses 84,000
Net operating income 100,400
IV. SELECT CAPITALIZATION RATE
Capitalization rate: 7%
V. APPLY CAPITALIZATION RATE
I 100,400
--- = V = --------- = 1,434,300 (rounded)
R .07
Indicated value by income approach: 1,434,300
Gross rent and gross
income multiplier
approach The gross rent multiplier (GRM) and gross income multiplier (GIM) approaches
are simplified income-based methods used primarily for properties that produce
or might produce income but are not primarily income properties. Examples are
single-family homes and duplexes.
The methods consist of applying a multiplier to the estimated gross income or
gross rent of the subject. The multiplier is derived from market data on sale
prices and gross income or gross rent.
244 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
The advantage of the income multiplier is that it offers a relatively quick
indication of value using an informal methodology. However, the approach
leaves many variables out of consideration such as vacancies, credit losses, and
operating expenses. In addition, the appraiser must have market rental data to
establish multipliers.
Steps in the gross rent multiplier approach. There are two steps in the gross
rent multiplier approach.
First, select a gross rent multiplier by examining the sale prices and monthly rents
of comparable properties which have sold recently. The appraiser's judgment and
market knowledge are critical in determining an appropriate gross rent multiplier
for the subject. The gross rent multiplier for a property is:
𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒
= 𝐺𝑅𝑀
𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑙𝑦 𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡
Second, estimate the value of the subject by multiplying the selected GRM by the
subject's monthly income.
GRM x Subject monthly rent = estimated value
Exhibit 16.10 Gross Rent Multiplier Illustration
Property Sale price Monthly rent GRM
Comparable A 250,000 1660 151
Comparable B 248,000 1500 165
Comparable C 324,000 2,200 147
Comparable D 304,000 1,800 169
Subject 320,000 2,000 160
In the illustration, the indicated GRM for the subject is 160, based on the
appraiser's research and judgment. Applying the GRM to a rental rate of $2,000,
the indicated value for the subject is $320,000.
Steps in the gross income multiplier approach. The GIM approach is identical
to the GRM approach, except that a different denominator is used in the formula.
Step one is to select a gross income multiplier by examining the sale prices and
gross annual incomes of comparable properties which have sold recently. The
gross income multiplier for a property is:
𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒
=𝐺𝐼𝑀
𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠 𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒
Chapter 16: Appraising and Estimating Market Value 245
---PAGE_BREAK---
Step two is to estimate the value of the subject by multiplying the selected GIM
by the subject's gross annual income:
GIM x Subject gross annual income = estimated value
Exhibit 16.11 Gross Income Multiplier Illustration
Property Sale price Gross income GIM
Comparable A 250,000 19,920 12.55
Comparable B 248,000 18,000 13.78
Comparable C 324,000 26,400 12.27
Comparable D 304,000 21,600 14.07
Subject 324,000 24,000 13.50
In the illustration, the indicated GIM for the subject is 13.5 , based on the
appraiser's research and judgment. Applying the GIM to the property's gross
annual income gives an indicated value for the subject of $324,000.
REGULATION OF APPRAISAL PRACTICE
Licensure
Professional standards
Professional associations and designations
Licensure In 1989, Congress passed the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and
Enforcement Act (FIRREA) in response to the savings and loan crisis. This act
included provisions to regulate appraisal.
Title XI of FIRREA requires that competent individuals whose professional
conduct is properly supervised perform all appraisals used in federally-related
transactions. Such federally-related appraisals must be performed only by state-
certified appraisers. A state-certified appraiser is one who has passed the
necessary examinations and competency standards as established by each state in
conformance with the federal standards stated in FIRREA and USPAP (Uniform
Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice). The criteria for certification as a
minimum must follow those established by the Appraiser Qualifications Board of
the Appraisal Foundation.
Professional
standards The Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice (USPAP) is a set of
standards, guidelines and provisions for the appraisal industry. It resulted from
the cooperation of nine national appraisal organizations in 1985.
246 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
The "competence" provision requires appraisers to assess whether they have the
necessary knowledge and competence to perform a specific assignment. If they
do not, they must disclose this fact.
The "departure" provision permits appraisers to perform an appraisal that does
not meet all the USPAP guidelines provided they have informed the client of the
limitations of the incomplete appraisal and if the partial appraisal will not be
misleading.
The "standards" concern:
 recognized appraisal methods
 definition of due diligence
 how appraisal results are reported
 disclosures and assumptions
 appraisal review
 real estate analysis
 mass appraisals
 personal property appraisals
 business appraisals
 compliance with USPAP
 compliance with the Code of Professional
Ethics and Standards of Professional Practice
Professional
associations and
designations Prior to the establishment of state certification programs, the only indication of
professional competence for an appraiser was membership in and designation by
one of the national appraisal associations. These associations continue to provide
education and recognition of professional accomplishment for appraisers.
The appraisal organizations who jointly formed the Appraisal Foundation in 1987
are:
 American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers
 American Society of Appraisers
 American Society of Farm Managers and Rural Appraisers
 International Association of Assessing Officers
 International Right of Way Association
 National Association of Independent Fee Appraisers
 National Society of Real Estate Appraisers
 Society of Real Estate Appraisers
The American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers and the Society of Real Estate
Appraisers have since joined to become the Appraisal Institute.
Chapter 16: Appraising and Estimating Market Value 247
---PAGE_BREAK---
16
Appraising and Estimating Market Value
Snapshot Review
REAL ESTATE VALUE ● present monetary worth of benefits arising from ownership, including: income,
appreciation, use, tax benefits
Foundations of
real estate value ● anticipation, substitution, contribution, change, highest and best use, conformity,
supply, demand, progression, regression, assemblage, subdivision, utility,
transferability
Types of value ● market, reproduction, replacement, salvage, plottage, assessed, condemned,
depreciated, reversionary, appraised, rental, leasehold, insured, book, mortgage
APPRAISING
MARKET VALUE
Market value ● price willing buyer and seller would agree on given: cash transaction, exposure,
information, no pressure, arm's length, marketable title, no hidden influences
The appraisal
and its uses ● a professional's opinion of value, supported by data, regulated, following
professional standards; used in real estate decision-making
Measuring living area ● standards vary by locality; national guidelines from ANSI and Fannie Mae
Steps in the
appraisal process ● define purpose, collect and analyze data, identify highest and best use, estimate
land value, apply basic appraisal approaches, reconcile, compile report
SALES COMPARISON
APPROACH ● most commonly used; relies on principles of substitution and contribution
Steps in the approach ● compare sale prices, adjust comparables to account for differences with subject
Identifying comparables ● must be physically similar, in subject's vicinity, recently sold in arm's length sale
Adjusting comparables ● deduct from comp if better than subject; add to comp if worse than subject
Weighting adjustments ● best indicator has fewest and smallest adjustments, least net adjustment from the
sale price
Broker's comparative
market analysis ● abridged sales comparison approach by brokers and agents to find a price range
COST APPROACH ● most often used for recently built properties and special-purpose buildings
Types of cost appraised ● reproduction: precise duplicate; replacement: functional equivalent
Depreciation ● loss of value from deterioration, or functional or economic obsolescence
Steps in the approach ● land value plus depreciated reproduction or replacement cost of improvements
INCOME APPROACH ● used for income properties and in a rental market with available rental data
Steps in the approach ● value = NOI divided by the capitalization rate
GRM and GIM approach ● GRM: price divided by monthly rent; value: GRM times monthly rent; GIM:
price divided by gross annual income; value: GIM times annual income
REGULATION
OF APPRAISAL
Licensure ● state-licensed or -certified per FIRREA/USPAP for federally-related appraisals
Professional standards ● USPAP establishes appraisal standards, guidelines and provisions
Professional associations
and designations ● founders of Appraisal Foundation offer education and professional designations
248 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama