29
Alabama License Law
29
Violations
General Issues
Honesty and Good Faith Issues
Accountability and Reporting Issues
Representation Issues
GENERAL ISSUES
Violations of AREC rules
Pleading guilty or nolo contendere
Final money judgment
Not fulfilling obligations to transaction parties
Failure to report legal action disposition
The Alabama License Law and the AREC Administrative Rules set forth the
roles and acceptable behaviors of real estate professionals. Refusing or
neglecting to follow these laws and rules is a violation punishable by temporary
or permanent loss of license, fines, reprimands, required education coursework,
restitution payment, or any combination of these measures.
The AREC or its staff may investigate the actions of any licensee. A member of
the public or of the real estate profession may file a written complaint with the
AREC about the behavior of any licensee. In either case, the Commission will
take steps to determine if the licensee has indeed committed a violation. These
steps are discussed in detail in an earlier chapter.
The following sections list possible violations as they are written in the license
law and administrative rules.
Violations of AREC
rules
As mentioned, violating or disregarding any provision of the Alabama license
law or any rule, regulation, or order of the Commission is punishable if an
investigation and subsequent hearing determines the licensee is guilty.
Pleading guilty or
nolo contendere Entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or a crime involving
moral turpitude is also a violation. This also includes being found guilty of a
felony or a crime of moral turpitude.
Pleading nolo contendere is not an admission of guilt. It is a plea of no contest
wherein the individual does not accept or deny responsibility for the charges but
does agree to accept punishment.
Crimes involving moral turpitude include conduct that goes against community
standards of justice, honesty, or good morals. They have a level of vileness or
496 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
depravity against another person or society that shocks the public conscience.
Such crimes include forgery, robbery, rape, murder, kidnapping, and aggravated
assault. A crime involving moral turpitude often brings more severe criminal
charges or penalties.
Final money
judgment Any act or omission that occurs while the licensee is pursuing his or her real
estate business or that involves the goodwill of an existing real estate business
and that results in the licensee having a final money judgment rendered against
him or her is also a violation.
For example, a buyer could potentially sue a licensee because the licensee did not
make all required disclosures. In such a suit, the buyer may be granted a final
money judgment to cover any damages the buyer suffered due to the lack of
disclosure. In this case, the licensee would have violated the law by omitting the
disclosures and, consequently, having a judgment against him or her.
Not fulfilling
obligations to
transaction parties The license law outlines specific obligations licensees have to real estate
consumers, whether customers or clients, as covered in a previous chapter.
Failure to meet these obligations is a violation of the law.
An example of such a violation would be failing to keep confidential information
confidential or failing to present purchase offers as received by the licensee. A
violation would also occur with failing to disclose material facts regarding the
property or transaction.
Failure to report
legal action
disposition If a licensee has action taken against him or her in a criminal or civil matter
involving a real estate transaction, the licensee must notify the Commission
within 10 days after receiving notice of the action. Notice to the Commission
must be in writing and sent certified mail. The notice should also include a copy
of the summons and complaint. In the case of a criminal charge, the notice must
include the specific charge and a copy of any indictment or information alleging
the charges. Failure to notify the Commission in this manner and this time frame
is a violation.
For example, if a client has filed a suit against the licensee for misrepresentation
or failure to disclose, the licensee must let the Commission know about the suit
within 10 days of receiving notice of the suit.
Chapter 29: Alabama License Law Violations 497
---PAGE_BREAK---
HONESTY AND GOOD FAITH ISSUES
Dishonesty in procuring license
Dishonesty in personal real estate transactions
Failure to disclose defects
False promises to influence or induce
Misrepresentation through other agents
Deceitful advertising
Inducing a party to breach a contract
Dishonest dealings, bad faith, untrustworthiness
Unlicensed person acting on behalf of licensee
Failure to disclose intention to purchase
Failure to disclose the true terms of a contract
Acting negligently or incompetently
One of the personal qualifications required for obtaining a real estate license in
Alabama is that the applicant must be trustworthy and competent to practice real
estate. Under Alabama license law, the first obligation that licensees have to all
consumers is to provide services honestly and in good faith.
Any of the following acts which defy the obligation of honesty and good faith is
a violation of the law.
Dishonesty in
procuring license The license law stipulates requirements for obtaining a real estate license. If a
licensee or applicant uses fraud, misrepresentation, or deceit or makes a material
misstatement of fact to obtain or attempt to obtain a license, he or she has
violated the law. Such is the case whether the license is for him or herself or for
another person.
This offense would include such actions as cheating on the licensure
examination, making false statements on the application, using the licensee's
name to obtain a license for someone else, and so on.
Dishonesty in
personal real
estate transactions Licensees are required to be honest and forthright when selling, buying, trading,
or renting real property belonging to the licensee or to his or her spouse, child, or
parent. If the licensee is dishonest or commits fraud or misrepresentation in this
situation, he or she has violated the law.
Let's say that licensee Lenny is representing a buyer who is interested in a home
that Lenny just happens to own. However, Lenny doesn't disclose his ownership
of the home. Lenny also does not disclose that the home was flooded a year ago,
resulting in the occurrence of black mold in the basement that was not
professionally removed. When the buyer makes an offer on the home, Lenny tells
the buyer that the owner has multiple offers and encourages the buyer to
drastically increase his offer price.
Lenny has violated the law by failing to disclose his interest in the property, by
failing to disclose material facts about the property that will put the buyer's health
498 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
at risk, and by being dishonest about the multiple offers as a ploy to obtain a
higher price.
Failure to disclose
defects Even though Alabama is a caveat emptor state, the license law states that
licensees must not make a material misrepresentation or fail to disclose any latent
structural defect or other defect to the potential buyer. The licensee must know
about the defect(s), and the defects must not be trivial or insignificant. The
defects must qualify as significant factors in the buyer deciding whether or not to
purchase or lease the property.
If we look again at licensee Lenny who is selling his own home and not
disclosing his ownership interest or the previous mold issue, we might also
discover that the home has structural issues from the flooding and length of time
the flood water sat in the home. Of course, Lenny doesn't disclose this structural
issue either. Consequently, Lenny has committed yet another violation of the law
by not disclosing a latent structural defect that, if the buyer knew about, could
potentially cause the buyer to walk away from the purchase.
False promises to
influence or
induce Considering that the law requires licensees to be honest in real estate
transactions, making false promises to influence, persuade, or induce a person to
sign a contract or agreement is dishonest and a violation of the law.
For example, Lenny's home is next door to a rather run down home with an
unkempt yard, and the buyer is reluctant to purchase based on the neighboring
property. Lenny is untruthful in telling the buyer that the neighboring property
has just been purchased and the new owners will be renovating the home and
cleaning up the yard. Lenny promises the buyer that the house next door will be
beautiful within a few months. Reality is that the current neighbors have no
intention of selling the home or cleaning up the property.
Furthermore, to influence the buyer to sign the purchase agreement, Lenny
promises the buyer that once the neighbor's property is cleaned up and renovated,
the value of the home Lenny is selling will increase by at least 25%, resulting in
the buyer ending up with considerable equity in the home. If the buyer should
resell the home, he or she would obtain a much higher asking price than what the
buyer will pay.
Lenny has made multiple false promises to influence the buyer to sign a purchase
agreement. Lenny has violated the law.
Misrepresentation
through other
agents Just as licensees are not allowed to make false promises to influence a person to
sign a contract, the licensee is also not allowed to continue the false promises or
misrepresentations through other agents or salespersons. The licensee also may
not continue the deception through any form of advertising.
Once again using Lenny as an example, if he uses another agent to further
influence the buyer to purchase the home based on Lenny's false promises and
misrepresentation, Lenny has violated this particular section of the law. If Lenny
Chapter 29: Alabama License Law Violations 499
---PAGE_BREAK---
advertises the home for sale with any of these misrepresentations or false
promises, that is also a violation of this law.
Deceitful
advertising Actually, the law specifically prohibits deceptive advertising. Licensees must not
publish or cause to be published any advertisement that deceives the public, even
if it is only likely to deceive. Advertisements must not create a misleading
impression.
For example, let's say a licensee publishes the following advertisement:
Beautiful 4-bedroom home in up and coming neighborhood with child-
friendly park and waterfront homes. For more details, call Harold
Connor at 555-8382.
In reality, the home has 3 bedrooms and a garage that is enclosed and is currently
being used as a fourth bedroom although it does not contain any closets. The
"child-friendly" park is really a vacant lot at the end of the street, and the
"waterfront" homes sit adjacent to a fenced retention pond.
The ad for this home is deceptive and certainly gives a misleading impression of
the home. Consequently, the ad and the licensee are in violation of the law.
Inducing a party
to breach a contract Typically, parties to a transaction sign a contract with terms to which all of the
parties have agreed. Neither party may breach the contract without consequences.
At the same time, the licensee must not convince either party to breach the
contract and substitute a new one that will benefit the licensee more than the
original contract.
Licensee Linda represents a seller who has already signed a purchase agreement
with a buyer. The contract states the amount of the purchase price at $250,000.
Both seller and buyer have agreed to that price. However, Linda knows that a
higher purchase price will bring her a higher commission payment. If Linda
convinces the seller to breach the contract and substitute a new contract with an
increased selling price, Linda has violated this law.
Another example would be if Licensee Linda changes qualifying brokers and
tries to take this client's listing with her to the new brokerage firm. The listing
agreement is with the original firm and cannot be moved to the new firm unless
the client breaches the contract with the original brokerage firm. If Linda
convinces the client to cancel the original contract and sign another one at the
new firm, she is violating this law.
Dishonest dealings,
bad faith,
untrustworthiness Remember that Alabama real estate laws and rules emphasize honesty and good
faith. Trustworthiness is not just a good quality, it is a requirement. Therefore,
anything that a real estate professional does that constitutes dishonest dealings,
bad faith, or untrustworthiness is a violation of the Alabama License Law.
Many examples can be cited: if a client tells his or her agent something in
confidence, trusting the agent to keep the confidence, the agent must exercise
trustworthiness by keeping the confidence. If the licensee receives offers to
purchase a client's property, the agent must exercise good faith by delivering the
500 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
offers to the client in a timely manner. The agent must also exercise good faith to
the client by negotiating the best price for a property. Licensees must continually
demonstrate that they can be trusted. If they fail to demonstrate that or fail to be
honest and trustworthy, they have violated the law that requires this of them.
Unlicensed person
acting on behalf of
licensee The law is specific on what acts require a real estate salesperson or broker
license. Remember that the law requires a real estate license for anyone who
sells, buys, leases, rents, exchanges real property or negotiates to sell, buy, lease,
rent, or exchange real property for another person for compensation. An
unlicensed person who performs any of those acts for compensation is breaking
the law.
The law also stipulates that, if anyone helps, employs, or establishes an
association with an unlicensed person and expects or requires the unlicensed
person to perform any of those acts, that individual is also breaking the law.
So, if a qualifying broker hires an unlicensed individual for the purpose of listing
and showing properties, the qualifying broker is violating this law.
Furthermore, an individual is also prohibited from aiding, abetting, or conspiring
with a person to circumvent the licensing requirements outlined in the license
laws.
For example, Joe wants to work as a real estate broker, but he does not have a
license. Joe doesn't meet the qualifications for licensure because he never
graduated from high school or obtained a GED. Sarah falsifies a high school
diploma and graduation records for Joe so he can qualify for licensure. Not only
has Joe violated the law, but so has Sarah.
Failure to disclose
intention to
purchase If a licensee is interested in purchasing the property his or her seller client is
selling, the licensee must disclose the interest to the client. If the agent selling the
property is the licensee's associate, the licensee still must disclose his or her
interest in purchasing the property. Whether the licensee plans to buy the
property directly or indirectly, the licensee still must disclose his or her interest.
This mandate is similar to the one that requires a licensee to disclose his or her
own interest in a property the licensee is selling. Both situations require the
licensee to let the client know about the licensee's interest in the property.
If Tami has a client who is selling a home that Tami would like to buy, Tami
must tell the client that she will be the purchaser. However, let's say that Tami
wants to buy the home but doesn't want to disclose that to the seller. So, Tami
decides to have her father purchase the home and then transfer the title over to
Tami. In this way, Tami would be purchasing the home indirectly, but, under
Alabama law, she would still be required to disclose this to the seller. Failure to
do so is a violation of the law.
Failure to disclose
the true terms of
a contract Licensees must disclose the true terms of a real estate sale to any lender,
guaranteeing agency, or any other interested party. Along the same lines,
Chapter 29: Alabama License Law Violations 501
---PAGE_BREAK---
licensees must not misrepresent the terms of the sale to any of these agencies or
interested parties.
For example, lenders give mortgage loans based on the value of the property. If
the value of a property is misrepresented to the lender at $250,000 when the
value is really $200,000, the loan to value ratio will be incorrect. The lender will
most likely set up a mortgage loan at a higher amount than the property supports.
The licensee who misrepresented the property's true value will have violated this
particular law.
Keeping in mind many of the other mandates of the law, the licensee will also
have violated mandated honesty, trustworthiness, and good faith.
Acting negligently
or incompetently To qualify for a license, Alabama law requires a person to be trustworthy and
competent to practice real estate. The law also sets forth the acts for which an
individual must possess a real estate license. The law further mandates that an
individual must not act negligently or incompetently in performing any of those
acts which require a license.
So, let's use Jim as an example. Jim holds a real estate broker license and is in the
process of handling a transaction for a client purchasing a home. Jim knows he
has certain obligations to the client, such as looking out for the client's best
interest and negotiating the best purchase price for the home. However, Jim has
been rather distracted lately and has not been fulfilling his obligations. Jim
neglected to suggest his client have the home inspected. He also neglected to
point out to the client that the home is in a deed restricted community. Further,
Jim didn't appear to know how to negotiate the best price. When the seller
counter offered at a higher price, Jim recommended that his client offer an even
higher price than the counteroffer, just to" seal the deal."
The buyer was confused by Jim's recommendation but figured Jim, as a
professional, knew what he was doing. Unfortunately, the client was wrong. Jim
was negligent and acting incompetently during most of the transaction, costing
the client thousands of dollars. By doing so, Jim violated the law that says he
must not act negligently or incompetently when practicing the business of real
estate.
502 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
ACCOUNTABILITY AND REPORTING ISSUES
Mishandling trust funds
Commingling
Failure to keep funds in a separate, federally insured account
Failure to keep records for 3 years
Paying commission to unlicensed person
Undisclosed or post-closing rebates
Lottery inducements
Accepting commission from anyone other than qualifying broker
Failure to provide estimated closing costs
Failure to submit records
Failure to provide AREC-requested information
Failure to return records
Failure to report address change
Alabama license law specifies what constitutes violations of the honesty and
trustworthiness requirements and the obligations a licensee has to consumers.
The law also specifies what actions constitute accountability and reporting
violations.
Mishandling trust
funds The law is clear on how licensees are to handle funds belonging to others. The
law states that licensees must account for all money he or she receives which
belongs to someone else and what the licensee must do with that money.
Therefore, a licensee is violating the law if he or she fails to account for money
belonging to others which the licensee has received.
Licensee Julie received earnest money on a pending property sale. Let's take a
look at what Julie did with the money.
Julie received the earnest money in cash on Monday. She decided to hang onto
the money for a while to see if the sale would actually go through. Although she
mentioned receiving the money to her qualifying broker, she did not turn the
funds over to him. Julie's qualifying broker knew she had the earnest money but
had no idea the amount of the funds. Julie herself had not recorded the amount,
date, client, or actual receipt of the funds.
As it turned out, the sale went through, and the transaction closed. However, Julie
had violated the law by not accounting for the funds and by not turning the funds
over to her qualifying broker for deposit,
Commingling The law also makes it clear that commingling, or mixing others' money with the
licensee's personal or business funds is not allowed.
So, if we go back to the case of Julie and the earnest money she received, let's see
what she actually did with the money while she was hanging onto it.
After Julie received the cash and mentioned it to her qualifying broker, she
decided she wouldn't have the funds deposited into the company's trust account
so she could readily access the money if necessary. Instead, she decided she
Chapter 29: Alabama License Law Violations 503
---PAGE_BREAK---
should at least deposit the cash into her personal checking account for safe
keeping. Three weeks later, Julie deposited the cash into her account, and she
didn't think about it again until the transaction was in its final stages.
While the money may or may not have been safe in Julie's personal account, it
didn't belong there. The law states any funds belonging to others must be turned
over to the qualifying broker and must be deposited into a trust account. Funds
belonging to others must not be commingled with funds belonging to the licensee
or the company. Julie violated that law.
Failure to keep
funds in separate,
federally insured
account Federally insured accounts protect any funds deposited into the account. Deposits
are insured for $250,000. Because of this security, Alabama license law requires
licensees to have any money belonging to others deposited into a separate
federally insured account in a financial institution located in Alabama.
Back to Julie: Most likely her personal checking account was at a federally
insured bank, so the funds were secure once they were deposited. However, we
already know she broke the law by depositing the cash into her own account and
not recording or accounting for the funds at all. What we might not have known
is that Julie's personal account is with a bank located across the state line in
Georgia. Additionally, Julie hung onto the cash for 3 weeks before she deposited
it.
During the 3 weeks she was hanging onto the cash, Julie was committing another
violation by not having the funds secured in a federally insured account. Once
Julie deposited the funds into her own account, she was still violating this
particular mandate because, not only were the funds commingled with Julie's
personal funds, but the money was deposited in a bank located outside of
Alabama.
Failure to keep
records for 3 years According to license law, if a document is touched or created by a licensee
during any real estate activities, the qualifying broker must be given a copy of the
document to be kept in his or her files. Documents which must be kept include all
contracts, leases, listings, and other records, including a complete record of all
funds that belong to others, showing to whom the money belongs, the date any
monies were deposited and/or withdrawn, and any other pertinent information.
All documents and records must be kept for at least 3 years. Failing to do so is a
violation of the law.
This mandate could be broken in multiple ways: first, the licensee could fail to
give copies of documents to the qualifying broker as required by law. Second, the
qualifying broker could fail to keep the records for at least 3 years as required.
One more way a violation could occur is if the records of funds belonging to
others do not include names and dates as required.
504 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
Paying commission
to unlicensed
person Because the law requires anyone performing specific acts in a real estate
transaction to be licensed if the individual is compensated for the acts, then an
unlicensed person may not be paid any profit, compensation, commission, or fee
for performing such acts. These acts include but are not limited to selling, buying,
leasing, renting, and exchanging real property or negotiating to sell, buy, lease,
rent, or exchange real property.
However, the law specifically does not prohibit a licensee from owning a
business organization whose purpose is to receive payments of profits,
compensation, commissions, or fees. In this case, the business does not need to
hold a real estate license as long as it does not engage in any other activity that
requires a license.
So, let's say that Jerrod is a licensed real estate broker. His friend Frank helps him
from time to time in certain real estate transactions. Frank is not licensed, so
Jerrod is careful about what he allows Frank to do. However, Jerrod is not as
careful as he should be. He allows Frank to show property and, in return, pays
Frank a percentage of any commission received when the property sells.
Jerrod has violated two laws: he is allowing an unlicensed person to perform acts
that require a license, and he is compensating an unlicensed person for
performing acts that require a license.
Now let's say that Jerrod owns a business that collects any funds owed in relation
to real estate transactions. The business collects commissions, profits, and other
compensation and fees. That is all they do. However, the business is not licensed
under Alabama real estate license laws. Has Jerrod violated another law?
No, Jerrod has not violated another law. Jerrod is allowed to own such an
unlicensed business as long as the business does not perform any acts that require
a real estate license.
Undisclosed or
post-closing rebates Alabama law prohibits paying or receiving a rebate from any person in a real
estate transaction after the transaction has closed. By Commission definition, a
rebate is any unearned fee, kickback, or thing of value that is given in connection
with a real estate transaction. Further, the definition of a rebate implies it is
something given back after a transaction has occurred.
Giving any rebate or incentive legally depends mostly on how and when it is
given. In Alabama, the incentive must be given before or at closing and must be
disclosed to all parties involved in the transaction, to include the seller, buyer,
and lender or guaranteeing agency (FHA, VA, HUD). A rebate or other incentive
that is given after or outside of the closing and is related to the transaction
violates the law. Since rebates given before or during closing must be disclosed,
an undisclosed rebate related to the transaction also violates the law.
If the incentive is not disclosed to the lender, etc., the law that prohibits
misrepresentation or failure to disclose the true terms of a sale to the lender,
guaranteeing agency, or other interested parties will have been violated. In that
Chapter 29: Alabama License Law Violations 505
---PAGE_BREAK---
case, the guaranteeing agency could consider sanctions against the licensee for
failure to disclose.
Permissible incentives. The law does allow licensees to pay the following
incentives:
 cash to a property owner who lists his or her property with the
licensee to sell.
 cash to a customer to influence him or her to purchase a property
 an item, such as a car or refrigerator, to a customer to influence him
or her to purchase a property
 1 month's free rent to a customer to influence him or her to rent an
apartment
 repair expenses to influence a buyer and seller to sign a contract or
close a sale
An example of an illegal incentive would be something like this: if a buyer does
not qualify for a mortgage loan for a particular property, the licensee might give
the buyer a loan or gift that would allow the buyer to qualify for the loan. If that
loan or gift is not disclosed, not only has the licensee violated the law, but he or
she may also have criminal charges brought against him or her.
Lottery inducements Offering free lots or conducting lotteries to influence a party to purchase or lease
real estate is a violation of the license law. This practice also violates other laws.
If a licensee offers free lots as incentive to purchase or lease real estate, the
licensee must disclose the gift and its value, just as with rebates. Further, the
transfer of ownership of the lots would need to take place prior to or at closing of
the purchase or lease transaction, or the licensee has violated the law prohibiting
rebates.
In regard to offering lotteries, Alabama has criminal statutes prohibiting lotteries
of any kind. Therefore, licensees offering lotteries as incentives to purchase or
lease real estate would be violating these statutes and would most likely be
brought up on criminal charges.
Accepting
commission from
anyone other than
qualifying broker Salespersons and associate brokers may accept commission payments or any
other compensation only from their qualifying broker. Therefore, if a salesperson
or associate broker engages in activities that require a license and then accepts
any form of compensation directly from a seller, a company, or anyone else other
than the qualifying broker, that salesperson or associate broker has violated the
law.
For example, Betsy is Tim's agent handling the sale of his family home. Betsy
has done a great job of showing the home and finding just the right buyer. So,
Tim is grateful to Betsy for making the experience pleasant. Therefore, Tim pays
Betsy the agreed-upon commission when the sale closes. Betsy thanks Tim and
deposits the commission into her personal bank account.
506 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
Betsy has violated the law. She should have had the commission paid to her
qualifying broker and then accepted payment from him or her.
Failure to provide
estimated
closing costs Licensees are required to prepare and present estimated closing statements to
both the seller and the buyer in a real estate transaction. The estimated closing
statement must be presented to the buyer when an offer is written and to the seller
when an offer is received. The estimated closing statement shows what costs are
involved in the transaction and the approximate amount of those costs.
Terry has a client looking to purchase a home. Terry has found just the right
home for the buyer, and together, Terry and his client have written an offer. Terry
knows he's supposed to show his client an estimated closing statement when they
present the offer, but he decides to wait to see if the seller accepts the offer. After
all, the seller may counter offer, causing some of the numbers on the estimated
closing statement to change.
While Terry's decision to wait may seem like a good idea, it is a violation of
Alabama license law that states the buyer must be informed of closing costs and
the approximate amount of those costs at the time the offer is written, not at the
time the offer is accepted.
Failure to submit
records From time to time, the AREC may request a licensee or qualifying broker to
produce documents, books, or other records related to a real estate transaction for
the Commission's inspection or the inspection of their authorized representative.
The law mandates that these records must be produced on demand and that
failing to refusing to do so is a violation of the law.
Jason received a request from the AREC to produce any records and documents
related to a real estate transaction involving Cara and Sam Connor. As the
company's qualifying broker, Jason is in possession of all transaction-related
records. While putting the records together to turn over to the AREC, Jason
notices a problem with the estimated closing statement one of his associate
brokers produced. Not wanting the Commission to see the problem, Jason does
not include the document with the other records he will turn over to the
Commission.
Jason believes he is protecting his associate broker and his real estate firm by not
revealing the problem document. What Jason is doing is breaking the law and
compounding the problem. Having a document with an error that was not
discovered and corrected is a problem, but refusing to produce that document for
the AREC is a bigger problem.
Failure to provide
AREC-requested
information Just as licensees and qualifying brokers are required to produce documents and
records upon the demand of the AREC, they are also required to provide any
information the Commission requests as part of an investigation or a complaint.
The law allows a "reasonable time" in which to provide the information. Failing
to provide the information is a violation of the law.
Let's go back to Jason and the request the AREC made of him to produce certain
records. In addition to the records, the Commission requested information about
Chapter 29: Alabama License Law Violations 507
---PAGE_BREAK---
the licensee involved in the transaction in question, along with information on the
property purchased.
Jason knows the law allows him a reasonable time in which to provide the
information, so he procrastinates getting the information to the Commission.
Then Jason gets busy and doesn't get around to putting the information together.
Every time he thinks about it, he figures he has plenty of time. In the end, 3
months passed with Jason still not providing the information to the Commission.
By definition, reasonable time is the amount of time that is fairly necessary to do
what is requested or required as soon as circumstances permit. Although the
license law provides a reasonable time and not a specific time period for the
broker to produce the information, the AREC most likely will not consider 3
months with still no information provided as reasonable. Jason is violating the
law by not providing the information within a reasonable time and certainly by
not providing it at all.
Failure to return
records During a real estate transaction, the licensee may find it necessary to obtain
certain documents or records from a client or other party to the transaction. If the
party provides the document and later wants the document returned, the licensee
must return the document to its rightful owner. Failure to do so is a violation of
the law unless the licensee has a legal cause for not returning the document.
During a transaction to purchase a home in a deed restricted community, Sue was
asked to give her agent a copy of her dog's shot records and license registration.
Sue complied because she understood the community's rule that all pets must be
kept up to date on their shots and licensing. Once the transaction closed and Sue
was moving into the new home, she told her agent she wanted her dog's records
returned to her. Her agent, however, stated he wanted to keep the records in his
file on the entire transaction and would not return them to Sue.
Not having legal cause to keep the dog's records, Sue's agent violated the law by
not returning the records to their rightful owner.
Failure to report
address change When a licensee is issued a license certificate, the certificate includes the address
of his place of business. If the licensee changes that address, he or she must
notify the Commission in writing within 30 days after the address changes. The
licensee needs to include both the company's old address and the new address in
the written notification. To change the business address, the qualifying broker
must return the company license and all broker and salesperson licenses to the
Commission with a transfer fee for each license. Failure to notify the AREC
within the 30 days, to include the required information, and/or to return the
company and other licenses violates the administrative rules of the AREC.
For example, Kelly owns a real estate firm on Main Street with 3 associate
brokers and 4 salespersons. Kelly is the qualifying broker for the firm. Kelly
recently found a new location over on Elm Street and has moved the entire office
operations to the new location. She's been so busy with the move and getting all
of her salespersons and brokers settled that she has not notified the Commission
of her new address, nor has she returned all of the current licenses as required. It's
been 3 weeks since she moved, so Kelly still has time to notify the Commission
508 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
of her address change and send in the licenses. If she meets the 30-day deadline,
she will be in compliance with the law. If not, she will be in violation.
REPRESENTATION ISSUES
Unauthorized dual agency
Failure to provide document copies
Improper brokerage name ad display
Improper sign placement
Taking a net listing
Omission of expiration date on listing
Failure to present all offers
Any licensee who represents clients or consumers in real estate transactions has
duties and obligations to the individuals he or she is representing. When licensees
do not fulfill those obligations, they are in violation of Alabama license law and
the AREC Administrative Rules.
Unauthorized
dual agency Licensees may enter into a few types of agency with consumers. One of those is
dual agency. The most important aspect of this relationship is that all parties to
the relationship must consent to their agent representing more than one party in
the same transaction. When the parties consent to this arrangement, they must do
so in writing. If the licensee does not obtain the authorization of all parties, the
licensee has violated the law.
Let's say that licensee Scott is in a position to represent both seller Raymond and
buyer Denise in the sale of Raymond's home and five acres of land. Both
Raymond and Denise want Scott to represent them, but they are not familiar with
dual agency relationships. Raymond is trying to figure out how to have Scott
represent just him and let Denise find her own agent. The situation is becoming
tense.
Scott explains to Raymond that he can legally represent both him and Denise in
the transaction under the dual agency relationship. Raymond agrees to the
arrangement, and the transaction progresses. There is just one problem: Scott
never informed Denise or obtained her authorization for the dual agency
relationship. Because the law states that Scott must obtain written consent from
all parties he is representing, getting only Raymond's consent was not enough.
Scott has violated the law.
Failure to provide
document copies When a party is involved in a real estate transaction, that party has the right to
receive copies of each document related to the transaction. It is the licensee's
obligation to furnish the copies, so failure to do so violates the law.
George is selling his property and has signed an agency agreement with Eddie, a
broker representing Home Hunters Realtors. Eddie and George have set forth the
terms of the agreement and the listing for the property. After Eddie has shown the
property several times without receiving any offers, George wants to take another
look at the agreement and listing contract. He asks Eddie for copies of the
Chapter 29: Alabama License Law Violations 509
---PAGE_BREAK---
documents, but Eddie says the documents are part of the firm's files and cannot
be copied. Not only has Eddie lied to his client, but he has broken the law that
says he must voluntarily furnish a copy of each listing, contract, lease, and other
document to each party executing the document. He must do so with reasonable
promptness.
Advertising without
prominently
displaying
brokerage name Advertising real estate in Alabama brings with it certain requirements under the
law. One requirement is that the advertiser must identify him or herself as a
licensed real estate salesperson or broker. Another requirement is that the
salesperson or broker must include the name or trade name of the qualifying
broker or company prominently on all advertising. Likewise, the qualifying
broker must not allow the salesperson or broker to advertise without including the
name or trade name of the company or qualifying broker prominently on all
advertising.
“Prominently” means the information must be printed in a larger font than is used
elsewhere in the ad for terms such as “for sale” or “for lease,” and the
information must be placed where it will get the attention of consumers who are
looking at the ad.
Tania puts together the following ad for a property she is contracted to sell:
Newly remodeled 3-bedroom condominium for sale. Small
homeowner association fee and nice amenities, including an indoor
pool and gym. Covered parking with security. Contact Tania Riley,
a licensed real estate broker, at 555-8855 for details.
Tania knows she must identify herself as a licensed broker within the ad, and she
shows the ad to her qualifying broker to assure she has done everything
according to the law. Her qualifying broker agrees that everything looks good
and approves the ad for placement in the local newspaper and online.
Once the ad is placed, both Tania and her qualifying broker will have violated the
law requiring the name or trade name of the company and qualifying broker to be
included in all advertising. By allowing the ad to be placed without the company
name showing prominently, the qualifying broker has also violated the law.
Placing a sign on
property without
owner's consent When a licensee signs a listing agreement with a client, one of the first things the
agent will want to do is advertise the property for sale. Placing a sign on the
property is one effective advertising technique. However, according to the law,
the licensee must obtain the client's consent before placing any signs on the
property. Failure to do so violates the law.
Lee has just signed a listing agreement with Terrance, so Lee is anxious to get the
property advertised and sold. While Lee is touring the home and taking
photographs, he places a for sale sign in the front yard. The sign meets all
advertising requirements by including the firm's name and Lee's license
designation, so Lee thinks he has done everything right. However, although Lee
asked for consent to photograph the home and advertise it for sale, he never
510 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
actually asked about placing a sign on the property. So, Lee has violated the law
that says he must obtain the consent of the property owner before placing a for
sale sign on the property.
Taking a net listing A net listing is one that stipulates a net price the owner must receive for the sale
of the property with any amount received over that net price going to the broker
as his or her commission. The commission is not based on a percent of the sale
price but is actually the amount in excess of the owner's required net price. Net
listings are not permitted in many states, including Alabama. Therefore, any
licensee accepting a net listing agreement for the sale of real property or any
interest in the property is in violation of the law.
For example, Caroline has a new client who wants to sell his home. The client
wants $350,000 for the home, not a penny more or less. Caroline thinks the home
is worth considerably more than $350,000, so she suggests they set up the
commission to be paid as any amount for which she can sell the home in excess
of the $350,000. As long as the client gets his $350,000, he doesn't care how
much she gets for the house, so he agrees to let Caroline's commission be
whatever amount over $350,000 she receives for the house. Both the client and
Caroline are happy with the arrangement.
However, what Caroline has done is set up a net listing. In doing so, she has
violated the law that prohibits net listings in Alabama.
Omission of
expiration date on
listing
The listing agreement creates an agency and fiduciary relationship between the
seller and the licensee. Most states require the listing agreement to be in writing
and to include an expiration date. The AREC Administrative Rules do not allow
automatic extensions of a listing agreement, so the expiration date must be
included. Failing to include a fixed expiration date in the listing agreement is a
violation. Further, the law requires a copy of the listing agreement to be given to
the principal (seller).
Brian signed a listing agreement with Sheri. Brian included an expiration date for
the agreement but told Sheri that the date was flexible. In case the property was
not sold by the stated expiration date, they would just set up an automatic
extension of the expiration date so the listing agreement would remain in effect
until the property was actually sold. That sounded okay to Sheri until she learned
that setting a flexible expiration date and/or automatically extending the
expiration date was against Alabama law. Sheri then declined to sign the listing
agreement and found another broker who did not violate the law or rules.
Failure to present
all offers When a licensee signs a listing agreement with a seller, one of the main
obligations the licensee has to the seller client is to present all written purchase
offers to the client. Failure to do so is a violation.
Ira has a listing agreement with Frank to sell Frank's farm. Ira has received only
one offer on the property. He knows he's supposed to show the offer to Frank, but
Ira thinks the offer is just too low. So, Ira decides to decline the offer without
showing it to Frank and to wait for a better offer to come in.
Chapter 29: Alabama License Law Violations 511
---PAGE_BREAK---
While it may seem like Ira is looking out for Frank's best interest, the law
requires Ira to show all written offers to Frank. It is not up to Ira to determine if
an offer is acceptable or not. He can advise Frank, but he cannot withhold any
offer. By doing so, Ira has violated the law.
512 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
29
Alabama License Law Violations
Snapshot Review
GENERAL ISSUES
Violations of AREC rules
● refusing or neglecting to follow rules is a punishable violation
● AREC may investigate to determine if licensee is guilty
Pleading guilty or nolo
contendere ● entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or a crime involving moral
turpitude violates the law
● being found guilty of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude is also a
violation
● crimes involving moral turpitude include robbery, rape, murder and other crimes
that go against community standards of honesty and good morals
Final money judgment
regarding real estate ● committing an act or omission while pursuing the licensee's real estate business
that results in a final money judgment against the licensee is a violation
Not fulfilling
obligations to
transaction parties ● licensees must meet all obligations to consumers as outlined in the law, whether
the consumer is a customer or a client
● failure to do so is a violation
Failure to inform AREC
of legal action
disposition ● any action taken against a licensee in a criminal or civil matter involving real
estate transactions must be reported to the AREC within 10 days of notice of the
action
● notice to the Commission must be in writing and sent certified mail
● notice must include a copy of the summons and complaint and the specific
criminal charge and indictment
● failure to notify the Commission and include all required copies is a violation
HONESTY AND GOOD
FAITH ISSUES
Dishonesty in procuring
license ● an applicant for licensure must follow all license law requirements when obtaining
a real estate license
● using fraud, misrepresentation, or deceit or making material misstatements of fact
to obtain a license, either for the applicant's self or someone else, is a violation
Dishonesty in
personal real
estate transactions ● licensees are required to be honest and forthright in practicing real estate when the
property belongs to the licensee or an immediate family member
● dishonesty, fraud, or misrepresentation when dealing with such property violates
the law
Failure to disclose
defects ● caveat emptor does not give licensees the right to make material misrepresentation
or fail to disclose latent structural defects or other defects if the licensee knows
about the defect and the defect is not insignificant
● the defect must qualify as a significant factor in the buyer's decision to purchase
the property or not
● failure to disclose these defects is a violation
False promises to
influence or induce ● licensees must be honest and not make false promises to influence anyone to sign
a contract
Chapter 29: Alabama License Law Violations 513
---PAGE_BREAK---
● making false promises for this purpose is against the law
Misrepresentation
through other agents ● licensees must not make false promises or misrepresentations through other agents
or through advertising
Deceitful advertising ● deceptive advertising is prohibited
● advertisements must not mislead the public
Inducing a party to
breach a contract ● licensees must not influence a party to breach a contract so the licensee can
substitute a new contract that benefits the licensee
Dishonest dealings, bad
faith, untrustworthiness ● honesty, good faith, and trustworthiness are requirements of the law for licensees
● dishonest dealings, bad faith, or untrustworthiness is a violation of license law
Unlicensed person
acting on behalf of
licensee ● license law requires a person to hold a license to perform certain activities
● an unlicensed person performing any activity that requires a license is violating
the law
● individuals who helps or expects an unlicensed person perform any act that
requires a license are also violating the law
Failure to disclose
intent to purchase ● licensees who want to purchase property belonging to his or her client must
disclose the licensee's interest to the client
● licensees must also disclose the interest of an associate who wants to purchase the
client's property
● disclosure is required whether the purchase is direct or indirect
Failure to disclose true
terms of a contract ● the true terms of a real estate sale must be disclosed to any lender, guaranteeing
agency, or other interested party
● licensees must not misrepresent the terms of the sale to any of these agencies or
parties
● guaranteeing agencies include the FHA, VA, and HUD
Acting negligently or
incompetently ● negligence or incompetence in performing activities that require a real estate
license is a violation
ACCOUNTABILITY
AND REPORTING
ISSUES
Mishandling trust funds ● failure to account for all funds belonging to others is a violation
Commingling ● commingling funds belonging to others with funds belonging to the licensee or the
company is a violation
Failure to keep funds in
separate, federally
insured account ● failure to deposit money belonging to others into a separate federally insured
account in a bank located in Alabama is a violation
Failure to keep records
for 3 years ● a copy of any document touched or created by a licensee during a transaction must
be given to the qualifying broker and kept for at least 3 years, or a violation occurs
● documents to be kept include contracts, leases, listings, records of funds belonging
to others, etc.
Paying commission to an
unlicensed person ● unlicensed persons must not perform activities that require a license
● unlicensed persons must not be compensated for performing activities which
require a license
514 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama
---PAGE_BREAK---
● no commission, profit, fee, or other compensation can be paid for an unlicensed
person selling, buying, leasing, renting, or exchanging property or negotiating to
do the same
● licensees may own a business that receives payments or compensation without the
business needing to be licensed
Undisclosed or post-
closing rebates ● rebates or incentives must be given prior to or at closing and must be disclosed, or
they are in violation of the law
● failing to disclose to a lender or guaranteeing agency could result in sanctions
against the licensee
Lottery inducements ● offering lots as incentive to purchase or lease properties is a violation unless the
same conditions as for rebates are followed: disclosure and transfer prior to or at
closing
● lotteries of any kind are illegal in Alabama and could lead to criminal prosecution
Accepting commission
from anyone other than
qualifying broker ● salespersons and brokers must only accept commission or other compensation
from their qualifying broker
Failure to provide
estimated closing costs ● licensees are required to prepare and present an estimated closing statement at the
time an offer is written or received
● the statement must show what costs are involved in the transaction and the
approximate amount of those costs
Failure to submit records ● any time the AREC requests records for their inspection, the records must be
produced to avoid violating the law
Failure to provide AREC-
requested information ● any time the AREC requests information related to a transaction as part of an
investigation, the information must be provided within a reasonable time
Failure to return records ● licensees must return any and all documents to the rightful owner upon demand or
will be in violation of the law unless the licensee has a legal cause for not
returning them
Failure to report address
change ● a change of address must be provided to the AREC within 30 days of the change
and sent along with the company license and all broker and salesperson licenses
which contain the old address
● notification to the AREC must include both the old address and the new address
REPRESENTATION
ISSUES
Unauthorized dual
agency ● dual agency is allowed in Alabama as long as all parties consent in writing
● failure to obtain the written consent of all parties is a violation
Failure to provide
Document copies ● all parties involved in a real estate transaction have a right to receives copies of all
documents related to the transaction
● failure to provide the copies is a violation
Advertising without
prominently displaying
brokerage name ● all advertising must prominently display the name of the brokerage company, as
well as the advertiser identifying him or herself as a licensed real estate
salesperson or broker
● qualifying brokers must not allow advertising without the company's name
showing prominently
Chapter 29: Alabama License Law Violations 515
---PAGE_BREAK---
Placing a sign on
property without
owner's consent ● failing to obtain the property owner's approval to place a for sale or for rent sign
(or any sign) on the property is against the law
Taking a net listing ● net listings are against the law in Alabama
● accepting a net listing is a violation of the license law
Omission of expiration
date on listing ● listing agreements must be in writing and include a fixed expiration date
● automatic extensions of a listing agreement are violations
● a copy of the listing agreement must be given to the seller
Failure to present all
offers ● licensees must present all received offers to the seller or be in violation of the
license law
516 Principles of Real Estate Practice in Alabama